What is are Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia ?
  - Adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of cancer in which the bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. - Leukemia may affect red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - There are different subtypes of AML. - Smoking, previous chemotherapy treatment, and exposure to radiation may affect the risk of adult AML. - Signs and symptoms of adult AML include fever, feeling tired, and easy bruising or bleeding. - Tests that examine the blood and bone marrow are used to detect (find) and diagnose adult AML. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of cancer in which the bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. Adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a cancer of the blood and bone marrow. This type of cancer usually gets worse quickly if it is not treated. It is the most common type of acute leukemia in adults. AML is also called acute myelogenous leukemia, acute myeloblastic leukemia, acute granulocytic leukemia, and acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia may affect red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Normally, the bone marrow makes blood stem cells (immature cells) that become mature blood cells over time. A blood stem cell may become a myeloid stem cell or a lymphoid stem cell. A lymphoid stem cell becomes a white blood cell. A myeloid stem cell becomes one of three types of mature blood cells: - Red blood cells that carry oxygen and other substances to all tissues of the body. - White blood cells that fight infection and disease. - Platelets that form blood clots to stop bleeding. In AML, the myeloid stem cells usually become a type of immature white blood cell called myeloblasts (or myeloid blasts). The myeloblasts in AML are abnormal and do not become healthy white blood cells. Sometimes in AML, too many stem cells become abnormal red blood cells or platelets. These abnormal white blood cells, red blood cells, or platelets are also called leukemia cells or blasts. Leukemia cells can build up in the bone marrow and blood so there is less room for healthy white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. When this happens, infection, anemia, or easy bleeding may occur. The leukemia cells can spread outside the blood to other parts of the body, including the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord), skin, and gums. This summary is about adult AML. See the following PDQ summaries for information about other types of leukemia: - Childhood Acute Myeloid Leukemia/Other Myeloid Malignancies Treatment - Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Treatment - Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment - Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment - Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Treatment - Hairy Cell Leukemia Treatment There are different subtypes of AML. Most AML subtypes are based on how mature (developed) the cancer cells are at the time of diagnosis and how different they are from normal cells. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of AML that occurs when parts of two genes stick together. APL usually occurs in middle-aged adults. Signs of APL may include both bleeding and forming blood clots.
Who is at risk for Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia? ?
Smoking, previous chemotherapy treatment, and exposure to radiation may affect the risk of adult AML. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Possible risk factors for AML include the following: - Being male. - Smoking, especially after age 60. - Having had treatment with chemotherapy or radiation therapy in the past. - Having had treatment for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in the past. - Being exposed to radiation from an atomic bomb or to the chemical benzene. - Having a history of a blood disorder such as myelodysplastic syndrome.
What are the symptoms of Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia ?
Signs and symptoms of adult AML include fever, feeling tired, and easy bruising or bleeding. The early signs and symptoms of AML may be like those caused by the flu or other common diseases. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Fever. - Shortness of breath. - Easy bruising or bleeding. - Petechiae (flat, pinpoint spots under the skin caused by bleeding). - Weakness or feeling tired. - Weight loss or loss of appetite.
How to diagnose Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia ?
Tests that examine the blood and bone marrow are used to detect (find) and diagnose adult AML. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Complete blood count (CBC): A procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - The number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - The amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - The portion of the sample made up of red blood cells. - Peripheral blood smear : A procedure in which a sample of blood is checked for blast cells, the number and kinds of white blood cells, the number of platelets, and changes in the shape of blood cells. - Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy : The removal of bone marrow, blood, and a small piece of bone by inserting a hollow needle into the hipbone or breastbone. A pathologist views the bone marrow, blood, and bone under a microscope to look for signs of cancer. - Cytogenetic analysis : A laboratory test in which the cells in a sample of blood or bone marrow are viewed under a microscope to look for certain changes in the chromosomes. Other tests, such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), may also be done to look for certain changes in the chromosomes. - Immunophenotyping : A process used to identify cells, based on the types of antigens or markers on the surface of the cell. This process is used to diagnose the subtype of AML by comparing the cancer cells to normal cells of the immune system. For example, a cytochemistry study may test the cells in a sample of tissue using chemicals (dyes) to look for certain changes in the sample. A chemical may cause a color change in one type of leukemia cell but not in another type of leukemia cell. - Reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction test (RTPCR): A laboratory test in which cells in a sample of tissue are studied using chemicals to look for certain changes in the structure or function of genes. This test is used to diagnose certain types of AML including acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL).
What is the outlook for Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on: - The age of the patient. - The subtype of AML. - Whether the patient received chemotherapy in the past to treat a different cancer. - Whether there is a history of a blood disorder such as myelodysplastic syndrome. - Whether the cancer has spread to the central nervous system. - Whether the cancer has been treated before or recurred (come back). It is important that acute leukemia be treated right away.
What are the stages of Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia ?
  - Once adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. - There is no standard staging system for adult AML. Once adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. The extent or spread of cancer is usually described as stages. In adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the subtype of AML and whether the leukemia has spread outside the blood and bone marrow are used instead of the stage to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used to determine if the leukemia has spread: - Lumbar puncture : A procedure used to collect a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the spinal column. This is done by placing a needle between two bones in the spine and into the CSF around the spinal cord and removing a sample of the fluid. The sample of CSF is checked under a microscope for signs that leukemia cells have spread to the brain and spinal cord. This procedure is also called an LP or spinal tap. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of the abdomen, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. There is no standard staging system for adult AML. The disease is described as untreated, in remission, or recurrent. Untreated adult AML In untreated adult AML, the disease is newly diagnosed. It has not been treated except to relieve signs and symptoms such as fever, bleeding, or pain, and the following are true: - The complete blood count is abnormal. - At least 20% of the cells in the bone marrow are blasts (leukemia cells). - There are signs or symptoms of leukemia. Adult AML in remission In adult AML in remission, the disease has been treated and the following are true: - The complete blood count is normal. - Less than 5% of the cells in the bone marrow are blasts (leukemia cells). - There are no signs or symptoms of leukemia in the brain and spinal cord or elsewhere in the body. Recurrent Adult AML Recurrent AML is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated. The AML may come back in the blood or bone marrow.
What are the treatments for Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with adult acute myeloid leukemia. - The treatment of adult AML usually has 2 phases. - Four types of standard treatment are used: - Chemotherapy - Radiation therapy - Stem cell transplant - Other drug therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Targeted therapy - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with adult acute myeloid leukemia. Different types of treatment are available for patients with adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. The treatment of adult AML usually has 2 phases. The 2 treatment phases of adult AML are: - Remission induction therapy: This is the first phase of treatment. The goal is to kill the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow. This puts the leukemia into remission. - Post-remission therapy: This is the second phase of treatment. It begins after the leukemia is in remission. The goal of post-remission therapy is to kill any remaining leukemia cells that may not be active but could begin to regrow and cause a relapse. This phase is also called remission continuation therapy. Four types of standard treatment are used: Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid (intrathecal chemotherapy), an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Intrathecal chemotherapy may be used to treat adult AML that has spread to the brain and spinal cord. Combination chemotherapy is treatment using more than one anticancer drug. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the subtype of AML being treated and whether leukemia cells have spread to the brain and spinal cord. See Drugs Approved for Acute Myeloid Leukemia for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of cancer being treated and whether leukemia cells have spread to the brain and spinal cord. External radiation therapy is used to treat adult AML. Stem cell transplant Stem cell transplant is a method of giving chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells that are abnormal or destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen and stored. After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the body's blood cells. Other drug therapy Arsenic trioxide and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) are anticancer drugs that kill leukemia cells, stop the leukemia cells from dividing, or help the leukemia cells mature into white blood cells. These drugs are used in the treatment of a subtype of AML called acute promyelocytic leukemia. See Drugs Approved for Acute Myeloid Leukemia for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Monoclonal antibody therapy is one type of targeted therapy being studied in the treatment of adult AML. Monoclonal antibody therapy is a cancer treatment that uses antibodies made in the laboratory from a single type of immune system cell. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia Untreated Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia Standard treatment of untreated adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) during the remission induction phase depends on the subtype of AML and may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy. - High-dose combination chemotherapy. - Low-dose chemotherapy. - Intrathecal chemotherapy. - All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) plus arsenic trioxide for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). - ATRA plus combination chemotherapy followed by arsenic trioxide for the treatment of APL. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with untreated adult acute myeloid leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia in Remission Treatment of adult AML during the remission phase depends on the subtype of AML and may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy. - High-dose chemotherapy, with or without radiation therapy, and stem cell transplant using the patient's stem cells. - High-dose chemotherapy and stem cell transplant using donor stem cells. - A clinical trial of arsenic trioxide. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with adult acute myeloid leukemia in remission. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Recurrent Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia There is no standard treatment for recurrent adult AML. Treatment depends on the subtype of AML and may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy. - Targeted therapy with monoclonal antibodies. - Stem cell transplant. - Arsenic trioxide therapy. - A clinical trial of arsenic trioxide therapy followed by stem cell transplant. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent adult acute myeloid leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Monoclonal antibody therapy is one type of targeted therapy being studied in the treatment of adult AML. Monoclonal antibody therapy is a cancer treatment that uses antibodies made in the laboratory from a single type of immune system cell. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia ?
  - Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of cancer in which the bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). - Leukemia may affect red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - Past treatment for cancer and certain genetic conditions affect the risk of having childhood ALL. - Signs of childhood ALL include fever and bruising. - Tests that examine the blood and bone marrow are used to detect (find) and diagnose childhood ALL. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a type of cancer in which the bone marrow makes too many immature lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (also called ALL or acute lymphocytic leukemia) is a cancer of the blood and bone marrow. This type of cancer usually gets worse quickly if it is not treated. ALL is the most common type of cancer in children. Leukemia may affect red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. In a healthy child, the bone marrow makes blood stem cells (immature cells) that become mature blood cells over time. A blood stem cell may become a myeloid stem cell or a lymphoid stem cell. A myeloid stem cell becomes one of three types of mature blood cells: - Red blood cells that carry oxygen and other substances to all tissues of the body. - Platelets that form blood clots to stop bleeding. - White blood cells that fight infection and disease. A lymphoid stem cell becomes a lymphoblast cell and then one of three types of lymphocytes (white blood cells): - B lymphocytes that make antibodies to help fight infection. - T lymphocytes that help B lymphocytes make the antibodies that help fight infection. - Natural killer cells that attack cancer cells and viruses. In a child with ALL, too many stem cells become lymphoblasts, B lymphocytes, or T lymphocytes. The cells do not work like normal lymphocytes and are not able to fight infection very well. These cells are cancer (leukemia) cells. Also, as the number of leukemia cells increases in the blood and bone marrow, there is less room for healthy white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. This may lead to infection, anemia, and easy bleeding. This summary is about acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children, adolescents, and young adults. See the following PDQ summaries for information about other types of leukemia: - Childhood Acute Myeloid Leukemia/Other Myeloid Malignancies Treatment - Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment - Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Treatment - Adult Acute Myeloid Leukemia Treatment - Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Treatment - Hairy Cell Leukemia Treatment
What are the symptoms of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia ?
Signs of childhood ALL include fever and bruising. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by childhood ALL or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: - Fever. - Easy bruising or bleeding. - Petechiae (flat, pinpoint, dark-red spots under the skin caused by bleeding). - Bone or joint pain. - Painless lumps in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin. - Pain or feeling of fullness below the ribs. - Weakness, feeling tired, or looking pale. - Loss of appetite.
How to diagnose Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia ?
Tests that examine the blood and bone marrow are used to detect (find) and diagnose childhood ALL. The following tests and procedures may be used to diagnose childhood ALL and find out if leukemia cells have spread to other parts of the body such as the brain or testicles: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient's health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Complete blood count (CBC) with differential : A procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - The number of red blood cells and platelets. - The number and type of white blood cells. - The amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - The portion of the sample made up of red blood cells. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy : The removal of bone marrow and a small piece of bone by inserting a hollow needle into the hipbone or breastbone. A pathologist views the bone marrow and bone under a microscope to look for signs of cancer. The following tests are done on blood or the bone marrow tissue that is removed: - Cytogenetic analysis : A laboratory test in which the cells in a sample of blood or bone marrow are viewed under a microscope to look for certain changes in the chromosomes of lymphocytes. For example, in Philadelphia chromosome positive ALL, part of one chromosome switches places with part of another chromosome. This is called the Philadelphia chromosome. - Immunophenotyping : A laboratory test in which the antigens or markers on the surface of a blood or bone marrow cell are checked to see if they are lymphocytes or myeloid cells. If the cells are malignant lymphocytes (cancer) they are checked to see if they are B lymphocytes or T lymphocytes. - Lumbar puncture : A procedure used to collect a sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the spinal column. This is done by placing a needle between two bones in the spine and into the CSF around the spinal cord and removing a sample of the fluid. The sample of CSF is checked under a microscope for signs that leukemia cells have spread to the brain and spinal cord. This procedure is also called an LP or spinal tap. This procedure is done after leukemia is diagnosed to find out if leukemia cells have spread to the brain and spinal cord. Intrathecal chemotherapy is given after the sample of fluid is removed to treat any leukemia cells that may have spread to the brain and spinal cord. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. The chest x-ray is done to see if leukemia cells have formed a mass in the middle of the chest.
What is the outlook for Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) depends on: - How quickly and how low the leukemia cell count drops after the first month of treatment. - Age at the time of diagnosis, gender, race, and ethnic background. - The number of white blood cells in the blood at the time of diagnosis. - Whether the leukemia cells began from B lymphocytes or T lymphocytes. - Whether there are certain changes in the chromosomes or genes of the lymphocytes with cancer. - Whether the child has Down syndrome. - Whether leukemia cells are found in the cerebrospinal fluid. - The child's weight at the time of diagnosis and during treatment. Treatment options depend on: - Whether the leukemia cells began from B lymphocytes or T lymphocytes. - Whether the child has standard-risk, high-risk, or very highrisk ALL. - The age of the child at the time of diagnosis. - Whether there are certain changes in the chromosomes of lymphocytes, such as the Philadelphia chromosome. - Whether the child was treated with steroids before the start of induction therapy. - How quickly and how low the leukemia cell count drops during treatment. For leukemia that relapses (comes back) after treatment, the prognosis and treatment options depend partly on the following: - How long it is between the time of diagnosis and when the leukemia comes back. - Whether the leukemia comes back in the bone marrow or in other parts of the body.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy CAR T-cell therapy is a type of immunotherapy that changes the patient's T cells (a type of immune system cell) so they will attack certain proteins on the surface of cancer cells. T cells are taken from the patient and special receptors are added to their surface in the laboratory. The changed cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. The CAR T cells are grown in the laboratory and given to the patient by infusion. The CAR T cells multiply in the patient's blood and attack cancer cells. CAR T-cell therapy is being studied in the treatment of childhood ALL that has relapsed (come back) a second time. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
Who is at risk for Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia? ?
  Past treatment for cancer and certain genetic conditions affect the risk of having childhood ALL. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. Possible risk factors for ALL include the following: - Being exposed to x-rays before birth. - Being exposed to radiation. - Past treatment with chemotherapy. - Having certain genetic conditions, such as: - Down syndrome. - Neurofibromatosis type 1. - Bloom syndrome. - Fanconi anemia. - Ataxia-telangiectasia. - Li-Fraumeni syndrome. - Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (mutations in certain genes that stop DNA from repairing itself, which leads to the growth of cancers at an early age). - Having certain changes in the chromosomes or genes. Risk Groups - In childhood ALL, risk groups are used to plan treatment. - Relapsed childhood ALL is cancer that has come back after it has been treated. In childhood ALL, risk groups are used to plan treatment. There are three risk groups in childhood ALL. They are described as: - Standard (low) risk: Includes children aged 1 to younger than 10 years who have a white blood cell count of less than 50,000/L at the time of diagnosis. - High risk: Includes children 10 years and older and/or children who have a white blood cell count of 50,000/L or more at the time of diagnosis. - Very high risk: Includes children younger than age 1, children with certain changes in the genes, children who have a slow response to initial treatment, and children who have signs of leukemia after the first 4 weeks of treatment. Other factors that affect the risk group include the following: - Whether the leukemia cells began from B lymphocytes or T lymphocytes. - Whether there are certain changes in the chromosomes or genes of the lymphocytes. - How quickly and how low the leukemia cell count drops after initial treatment. - Whether leukemia cells are found in the cerebrospinal fluid at the time of diagnosis. It is important to know the risk group in order to plan treatment. Children with high-risk or very highrisk ALL usually receive more anticancer drugs and/or higher doses of anticancer drugs than children with standard-risk ALL. Relapsed childhood ALL is cancer that has come back after it has been treated. The leukemia may come back in the blood and bone marrow, brain, spinal cord, testicles, or other parts of the body. Refractory childhood ALL is cancer that does not respond to treatment.
What are the treatments for Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia ?
  - There are different types of treatment for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). - Children with ALL should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood leukemia. - Children and adolescents may have treatment-related side effects that appear months or years after treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. - The treatment of childhood ALL usually has three phases. - Four types of standard treatment are used: - Chemotherapy - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant - Targeted therapy - Treatment is given to kill leukemia cells that have spread or may spread to the brain, spinal cord, or testicles. - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Different types of treatment are available for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Children with ALL should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood leukemia. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health professionals who are experts in treating children with leukemia and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. These may include the following specialists: - Pediatrician. - Hematologist. - Medical oncologist. - Pediatric surgeon. - Radiation oncologist. - Neurologist. - Pathologist. - Radiologist. - Pediatric nurse specialist. - Social worker. - Rehabilitation specialist. - Psychologist. - Child-life specialist. Children and adolescents may have treatment-related side effects that appear months or years after treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Regular follow-up exams are very important. Treatment can cause side effects long after it has ended. These are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include: - Physical problems, including problems with the heart, blood vessels, liver, or bones, and fertility. When dexrazoxane is given with chemotherapy drugs called anthracyclines, the risk of late heart effects is lessened. - Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. Children younger than 4 years who have received radiation therapy to the brain have a higher risk of these effects. - Second cancers (new types of cancer) or other conditions, such as brain tumors, thyroid cancer, acute myeloid leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome. Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the possible late effects caused by some treatments. See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer. The treatment of childhood ALL usually has three phases. The treatment of childhood ALL is done in phases: - Remission induction: This is the first phase of treatment. The goal is to kill the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow. This puts the leukemia into remission. - Consolidation /intensification: This is the second phase of treatment. It begins once the leukemia is in remission. The goal of consolidation/intensification therapy is to kill any leukemia cells that remain in the body and may cause a relapse. - Maintenance: This is the third phase of treatment. The goal is to kill any remaining leukemia cells that may regrow and cause a relapse. Often the cancer treatments are given in lower doses than those used during the remission induction and consolidation/intensification phases. Not taking medication as ordered by the doctor during maintenance therapy increases the chance the cancer will come back. This is also called the continuation therapy phase. Four types of standard treatment are used: Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid (intrathecal), an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Combination chemotherapy is treatment using more than one anticancer drug. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the child's risk group. Children with high-risk ALL receive more anticancer drugs and higher doses of anticancer drugs than children with standard-risk ALL. Intrathecal chemotherapy may be used to treat childhood ALL that has spread, or may spread, to the brain and spinal cord. See Drugs Approved for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of cancer being treated. External radiation therapy may be used to treat childhood ALL that has spread, or may spread, to the brain, spinal cord, or testicles. It may also be used to prepare the bone marrow for a stem cell transplant. Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Stem cell transplant is a method of giving high doses of chemotherapy and sometimes total-body irradiation, and then replacing the blood-forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of a donor. After the patient receives treatment, the donor's stem cells are given to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the patient's blood cells. The stem cell donor doesn't have to be related to the patient. Stem cell transplant is rarely used as initial treatment for children and adolescents with ALL. It is used more often as part of treatment for ALL that relapses (comes back after treatment). See Drugs Approved for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia for more information. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are targeted therapy drugs that block the enzyme, tyrosine kinase, which causes stem cells to become more white blood cells or blasts than the body needs. Imatinib mesylate is a TKI used in the treatment of children with Philadelphia chromosome positive ALL. Dasatinib and ruxolitinib are TKIs that are being studied in the treatment of newly diagnosed high-risk ALL. Monoclonal antibody therapy is a cancer treatment that uses antibodies made in the laboratory, from a single type of immune system cell. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. Blinatumomab and inotuzumab are monoclonal antibodies being studied in the treatment of refractory childhood ALL. New kinds of targeted therapies are also being studied in the treatment of childhood ALL. See Drugs Approved for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia for more information. Treatment is given to kill leukemia cells that have spread or may spread to the brain, spinal cord, or testicles. Treatment to kill leukemia cells or prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system; CNS) is called CNS-directed therapy. Chemotherapy may be used to treat leukemia cells that have spread, or may spread, to the brain and spinal cord. Because standard doses of chemotherapy may not reach leukemia cells in the CNS, the cells are able to hide in the CNS. Systemic chemotherapy given in high doses or intrathecal chemotherapy (into the cerebrospinal fluid) is able to reach leukemia cells in the CNS. Sometimes external radiation therapy to the brain is also given. These treatments are given in addition to treatment that is used to kill leukemia cells in the rest of the body. All children with ALL receive CNS-directed therapy as part of induction therapy and consolidation/intensification therapy and sometimes during maintenance therapy. If the leukemia cells spread to the testicles, treatment includes high doses of systemic chemotherapy and sometimes radiation therapy. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy CAR T-cell therapy is a type of immunotherapy that changes the patient's T cells (a type of immune system cell) so they will attack certain proteins on the surface of cancer cells. T cells are taken from the patient and special receptors are added to their surface in the laboratory. The changed cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. The CAR T cells are grown in the laboratory and given to the patient by infusion. The CAR T cells multiply in the patient's blood and attack cancer cells. CAR T-cell therapy is being studied in the treatment of childhood ALL that has relapsed (come back) a second time. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy is done during all phases of treatment to see how well the treatment is working. Treatment Options for Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Newly Diagnosed Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (Standard Risk) The treatment of standard-risk childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) during the remission induction, consolidation /intensification, and maintenance phases always includes combination chemotherapy. When children are in remission after remission induction therapy, a stem cell transplant using stem cells from a donor may be done. When children are not in remission after remission induction therapy, further treatment is usually the same treatment given to children with high-risk ALL. Intrathecal chemotherapy is given to prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. Treatments being studied in clinical trials for standard-risk ALL include new chemotherapy regimens. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with untreated childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Newly Diagnosed Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (High Risk) The treatment of high-risk childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) during the remission induction, consolidation /intensification, and maintenance phases always includes combination chemotherapy. Children in the high-risk ALL group are given more anticancer drugs and higher doses of anticancer drugs, especially during the consolidation/intensification phase, than children in the standard-risk group. Intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy are given to prevent or treat the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. Sometimes radiation therapy to the brain is also given. Treatments being studied in clinical trials for high-risk ALL include new chemotherapy regimens with or without targeted therapy or stem cell transplant. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with untreated childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Newly Diagnosed Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (Very High Risk) The treatment of very highrisk childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) during the remission induction, consolidation /intensification, and maintenance phases always includes combination chemotherapy. Children in the very highrisk ALL group are given more anticancer drugs than children in the high-risk group. It is not clear whether a stem cell transplant during first remission will help the child live longer. Intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy are given to prevent or treat the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. Sometimes radiation therapy to the brain is also given. Treatments being studied in clinical trials for very highrisk ALL include new chemotherapy regimens with or without targeted therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with untreated childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Newly Diagnosed Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (Special Groups) T-cell childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia The treatment of T-cell childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) during the remission induction, consolidation /intensification, and maintenance phases always includes combination chemotherapy. Children with T-cell ALL are given more anticancer drugs and higher doses of anticancer drugs than children in the newly diagnosed standard-risk group. Intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy are given to prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. Sometimes radiation therapy to the brain is also given. Treatments being studied in clinical trials for T-cell ALL include new anticancer agents and chemotherapy regimens with or without targeted therapy. Infants with ALL The treatment of infants with ALL during the remission induction, consolidation /intensification, and maintenance phases always includes combination chemotherapy. Infants with ALL are given different anticancer drugs and higher doses of anticancer drugs than children 1 year and older in the standard-risk group. It is not clear whether a stem cell transplant during first remission will help the child live longer. Intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy are given to prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. Treatments being studied in clinical trials for infants with ALL include the following: - A clinical trial of chemotherapy followed by a donor stem cell transplant for infants with certain gene changes. Children 10 years and older and adolescents with ALL The treatment of ALL in children and adolescents (10 years and older) during the remission induction, consolidation /intensification, and maintenance phases always includes combination chemotherapy. Children 10 years and older and adolescents with ALL are given more anticancer drugs and higher doses of anticancer drugs than children in the standard-risk group. Intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy are given to prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. Sometimes radiation therapy to the brain is also given. Treatments being studied in clinical trials for children 10 years and older and adolescents with ALL include new anticancer agents and chemotherapy regimens with or without targeted therapy. Philadelphia chromosomepositive ALL The treatment of Philadelphia chromosome positive childhood ALL during the remission induction, consolidation /intensification, and maintenance phases may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy and targeted therapy with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (imatinib mesylate) with or without a stem cell transplant using stem cells from a donor. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with T-cell childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and Philadelphia chromosome positive childhood precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Refractory Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia There is no standard treatment for the treatment of refractory childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Some of the treatments being studied in clinical trials for refractory childhood ALL include: - Targeted therapy (blinatumomab or inotuzumab). - Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy. Relapsed Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Standard treatment of relapsed childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) that comes back in the bone marrow may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy. - Chemotherapy with or without total-body irradiation followed by a stem cell transplant, using stem cells from a donor. Standard treatment of relapsed childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) that comes back outside the bone marrow may include the following: - Systemic chemotherapy and intrathecal chemotherapy with radiation therapy to the brain and/or spinal cord for cancer that comes back in the brain and spinal cord only. - Combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy for cancer that comes back in the testicles only. - Stem cell transplant for cancer that has recurred in the brain and/or spinal cord. Some of the treatments being studied in clinical trials for relapsed childhood ALL include: - New anticancer drugs and new combination chemotherapy treatments. - Combination chemotherapy and new kinds of targeted therapies (blinatumomab or inotuzumab). - Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. .
What is are Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma ?
  - Adult soft tissue sarcoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the soft tissues of the body. - Having certain inherited disorders can increase the risk of adult soft tissue sarcoma. - A sign of adult soft tissue sarcoma is a lump or swelling in soft tissue of the body. - Adult soft tissue sarcoma is diagnosed with a biopsy. - Certain factors affect treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery). Adult soft tissue sarcoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the soft tissues of the body. The soft tissues of the body include the muscles, tendons (bands of fiber that connect muscles to bones), fat, blood vessels, lymph vessels, nerves, and tissues around joints. Adult soft tissue sarcomas can form almost anywhere in the body, but are most common in the head, neck, arms, legs, trunk, and abdomen. There are many types of soft tissue sarcoma. The cells of each type of sarcoma look different under a microscope, based on the type of soft tissue in which the cancer began. See the following PDQ summaries for more information on soft tissue sarcomas: - Childhood Soft Tissue Sarcoma Treatment - Ewing Sarcoma Family of Tumors Treatment - Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors Treatment - Kaposi Sarcoma Treatment - Uterine Sarcoma Treatment
Who is at risk for Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma? ?
Having certain inherited disorders can increase the risk of adult soft tissue sarcoma. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for soft tissue sarcoma include the following inherited disorders: - Retinoblastoma. - Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1; von Recklinghausen disease). - Tuberous sclerosis (Bourneville disease). - Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; Gardner syndrome). - Li-Fraumeni syndrome. - Werner syndrome (adult progeria). - Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin syndrome). Other risk factors for soft tissue sarcoma include the following: - Past treatment with radiation therapy for certain cancers. - Being exposed to certain chemicals, such as Thorotrast (thorium dioxide), vinyl chloride, or arsenic. - Having swelling (lymphedema) in the arms or legs for a long time.
What are the symptoms of Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma ?
A sign of adult soft tissue sarcoma is a lump or swelling in soft tissue of the body. A sarcoma may appear as a painless lump under the skin, often on an arm or a leg. Sarcomas that begin in the abdomen may not cause signs or symptoms until they get very big. As the sarcoma grows bigger and presses on nearby organs, nerves, muscles, or blood vessels, signs and symptoms may include: - Pain. - Trouble breathing. Other conditions may cause the same signs and symptoms. Check with your doctor if you have any of these problems.
How to diagnose Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma ?
Adult soft tissue sarcoma is diagnosed with a biopsy. If your doctor thinks you may have a soft tissue sarcoma, a biopsy will be done. The type of biopsy will be based on the size of the tumor and where it is in the body. There are three types of biopsy that may be used: - Incisional biopsy : The removal of part of a lump or a sample of tissue. - Core biopsy : The removal of tissue using a wide needle. - Excisional biopsy : The removal of an entire lump or area of tissue that doesnt look normal. Samples will be taken from the primary tumor, lymph nodes, and other suspicious areas. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells and to find out the grade of the tumor. The grade of a tumor depends on how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope and how quickly the cells are dividing. High-grade tumors usually grow and spread more quickly than low-grade tumors. Because soft tissue sarcoma can be hard to diagnose, patients should ask to have tissue samples checked by a pathologist who has experience in diagnosing soft tissue sarcoma. The following tests may be done on the tissue that was removed: - Immunohistochemistry : A test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of tissue. The antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the tissue to light up under a microscope. This type of test may be used to tell the difference between different types of cancer. - Light and electron microscopy : A laboratory test in which cells in a sample of tissue are viewed under regular and high-powered microscopes to look for certain changes in the cells. - Cytogenetic analysis : A laboratory test in which cells in a sample of tissue are viewed under a microscope to look for certain changes in the chromosomes. - FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization): A laboratory test used to look at genes or chromosomes in cells and tissues. Pieces of DNA that contain a fluorescent dye are made in the laboratory and added to cells or tissues on a glass slide. When these pieces of DNA attach to certain genes or areas of chromosomes on the slide, they light up when viewed under a microscope with a special light. - Flow cytometry : A laboratory test that measures the number of cells in a sample, the percentage of live cells in a sample, and certain characteristics of cells, such as size, shape, and the presence of tumor markers on the cell surface. The cells are stained with a light-sensitive dye, placed in a fluid, and passed in a stream before a laser or other type of light. The measurements are based on how the light-sensitive dye reacts to the light.
What is the outlook for Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma ?
Certain factors affect treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery). The treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery) depend on the following: - The type of soft tissue sarcoma. - The size, grade, and stage of the tumor. - How fast the cancer cells are growing and dividing. - Where the tumor is in the body. - Whether all of the tumor is removed by surgery. - The patient's age and general health. - Whether the cancer has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma ?
  - After adult soft tissue sarcoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the soft tissue or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for adult soft tissue sarcoma: - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV After adult soft tissue sarcoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the soft tissue or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the soft tissue or to other parts of the body is called staging. Staging of soft tissue sarcoma is also based on the grade and size of the tumor, whether it is superficial (close to the skin's surface) or deep, and whether it has spread to the lymph nodes or other parts of the body. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - Complete blood count (CBC): A procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - The number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - The amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - The portion of the blood sample made up of red blood cells. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside of the body, such as the lung and abdomen, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. The results of these tests are viewed together with the results of the tumor biopsy to find out the stage of the soft tissue sarcoma before treatment is given. Sometimes chemotherapy or radiation therapy is given as the initial treatment and afterwards the soft tissue sarcoma is staged again. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if soft tissue sarcoma spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually soft tissue sarcoma cells. The disease is metastatic soft tissue sarcoma, not lung cancer. The following stages are used for adult soft tissue sarcoma: Stage I Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB: - In stage IA, the tumor is low-grade (likely to grow and spread slowly) and 5 centimeters or smaller. It may be either superficial (in subcutaneous tissue with no spread into connective tissue or muscle below) or deep (in the muscle and may be in connective or subcutaneous tissue). - In stage IB, the tumor is low-grade (likely to grow and spread slowly) and larger than 5 centimeters. It may be either superficial (in subcutaneous tissue with no spread into connective tissue or muscle below) or deep (in the muscle and may be in connective or subcutaneous tissue). Stage II Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB: - In stage IIA, the tumor is mid-grade (somewhat likely to grow and spread quickly) or high-grade (likely to grow and spread quickly) and 5 centimeters or smaller. It may be either superficial (in subcutaneous tissue with no spread into connective tissue or muscle below) or deep (in the muscle and may be in connective or subcutaneous tissue). - In stage IIB, the tumor is mid-grade (somewhat likely to grow and spread quickly) and larger than 5 centimeters. It may be either superficial (in subcutaneous tissue with no spread into connective tissue or muscle below) or deep (in the muscle and may be in connective or subcutaneous tissue). Stage III In stage III, the tumor is either: - high-grade (likely to grow and spread quickly), larger than 5 centimeters, and either superficial (in subcutaneous tissue with no spread into connective tissue or muscle below) or deep (in the muscle and may be in connective or subcutaneous tissue); or - any grade, any size, and has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Stage III cancer that has spread to the lymph nodes is advanced stage III. Stage IV In stage IV, the tumor is any grade, any size, and may have spread to nearby lymph nodes. Cancer has spread to distant parts of the body, such as the lungs.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma ?
Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What are the treatments for Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with adult soft tissue sarcoma. - Three types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Regional chemotherapy - Treatment for adult soft tissue sarcoma may cause side effects. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with adult soft tissue sarcoma. Different types of treatments are available for patients with adult soft tissue sarcoma. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Three types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery is the most common treatment for adult soft tissue sarcoma. For some soft-tissue sarcomas, removal of the tumor in surgery may be the only treatment needed. The following surgical procedures may be used: - Mohs microsurgery: A procedure in which the tumor is cut from the skin in thin layers. During surgery, the edges of the tumor and each layer of tumor removed are viewed through a microscope to check for cancer cells. Layers continue to be removed until no more cancer cells are seen. This type of surgery removes as little normal tissue as possible and is often used where appearance is important, such as on the skin. - Wide local excision: Removal of the tumor along with some normal tissue around it. For tumors of the head, neck, abdomen, and trunk, as little normal tissue as possible is removed. - Limb-sparing surgery: Removal of the tumor in an arm or leg without amputation, so the use and appearance of the limb is saved. Radiation therapy or chemotherapy may be given first to shrink the tumor. The tumor is then removed in a wide local excision. Tissue and bone that are removed may be replaced with a graft using tissue and bone taken from another part of the patient's body, or with an implant such as artificial bone. - Amputation: Surgery to remove part or all of a limb or appendage, such as an arm or leg. Amputation is rarely used to treat soft tissue sarcoma of the arm or leg. - Lymphadenectomy: A surgical procedure in which lymph nodes are removed and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. This procedure is also called a lymph node dissection. Radiation therapy or chemotherapy may be given before or after surgery to remove the tumor. When given before surgery, radiation therapy or chemotherapy will make the tumor smaller and reduce the amount of tissue that needs to be removed during surgery. Treatment given before surgery is called neoadjuvant therapy. When given after surgery, radiation therapy or chemotherapy will kill any remaining cancer cells. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is a type of 3-dimensional (3-D) radiation therapy that uses a computer to make pictures of the size and shape of the tumor. Thin beams of radiation of different intensities (strengths) are aimed at the tumor from many angles. This type of external radiation therapy causes less damage to nearby healthy tissue and is less likely to cause dry mouth, trouble swallowing, and damage to the skin. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy and internal radiation therapy may be used to treat adult soft tissue sarcoma. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. See Drugs Approved for Soft Tissue Sarcoma for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Regional chemotherapy Clinical trials are studying ways to improve the effect of chemotherapy on tumor cells, including the following: - Regional hyperthermia therapy: A treatment in which tissue around the tumor is exposed to high temperatures to damage and kill cancer cells or to make cancer cells more sensitive to chemotherapy. - Isolated limb perfusion: A procedure that sends chemotherapy directly to an arm or leg in which the cancer has formed. The flow of blood to and from the limb is temporarily stopped with a tourniquet, and anticancer drugs are put directly into the blood of the limb. This sends a high dose of drugs to the tumor. Treatment for adult soft tissue sarcoma may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma Stage I Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma Treatment of stage I soft tissue sarcoma may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor, such as Mohs microsurgery for small sarcomas of the skin, wide local excision, or limb-sparing surgery. - Radiation therapy before and/or after surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I adult soft tissue sarcoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage II Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma and Stage III Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma That Has Not Spread to Lymph Nodes Treatment of stage II adult soft tissue sarcoma and stage III adult soft tissue sarcoma that has not spread to lymph nodes may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor, such as wide local excision or limb-sparing surgery. - Radiation therapy before or after surgery. - Radiation therapy or chemotherapy before limb-sparing surgery. Radiation therapy may also be given after surgery. - High-dose radiation therapy for tumors that cannot be removed by surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II adult soft tissue sarcoma and stage III adult soft tissue sarcoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma That Has Spread to Lymph Nodes (Advanced) Treatment of stage III adult soft tissue sarcoma that has spread to lymph nodes (advanced) may include the following: - Surgery (wide local excision) with lymphadenectomy. Radiation therapy may also be given after surgery. - A clinical trial of surgery followed by chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of regional hyperthermia therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III adult soft tissue sarcoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage IV Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma Treatment of stage IV adult soft tissue sarcoma may include the following: - Chemotherapy. - Surgery to remove cancer that has spread to the lungs. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV adult soft tissue sarcoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
  - Childhood astrocytoma is a disease in which benign (noncancer) or malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain. - Astrocytomas may be benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer). - The central nervous system controls many important body functions. - The cause of most childhood brain tumors is not known. - The signs and symptoms of astrocytomas are not the same in every child. - Tests that examine the brain and spinal cord are used to detect (find) childhood astrocytomas. - Childhood astrocytomas are usually diagnosed and removed in surgery. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Childhood astrocytoma is a disease in which benign (noncancer) or malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain. Astrocytomas are tumors that start in star-shaped brain cells called astrocytes. An astrocyte is a type of glial cell. Glial cells hold nerve cells in place, bring food and oxygen to them, and help protect them from disease, such as infection. Gliomas are tumors that form from glial cells. An astrocytoma is a type of glioma. Astrocytoma is the most common type of glioma diagnosed in children. It can form anywhere in the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). This summary is about the treatment of tumors that begin in astrocytes in the brain (primary brain tumors). Metastatic brain tumors are formed by cancer cells that begin in other parts of the body and spread to the brain. Treatment of metastatic brain tumors is not discussed here. Brain tumors can occur in both children and adults. However, treatment for children may be different than treatment for adults. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about other types of brain tumors in children and adults: - Childhood Brain and Spinal Cord Tumors Treatment Overview - Adult Central Nervous System Tumors Treatment Astrocytomas may be benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer). Benign brain tumors grow and press on nearby areas of the brain. They rarely spread into other tissues. Malignant brain tumors are likely to grow quickly and spread into other brain tissue. When a tumor grows into or presses on an area of the brain, it may stop that part of the brain from working the way it should. Both benign and malignant brain tumors can cause signs and symptoms and almost all need treatment. The central nervous system controls many important body functions. Astrocytomas are most common in these parts of the central nervous system (CNS): - Cerebrum : The largest part of the brain, at the top of the head. The cerebrum controls thinking, learning, problem-solving, speech, emotions, reading, writing, and voluntary movement. - Cerebellum : The lower, back part of the brain (near the middle of the back of the head). The cerebellum controls movement, balance, and posture. - Brain stem : The part that connects the brain to the spinal cord, in the lowest part of the brain (just above the back of the neck). The brain stem controls breathing, heart rate, and the nerves and muscles used in seeing, hearing, walking, talking, and eating. - Hypothalamus : The area in the middle of the base of the brain. It controls body temperature, hunger, and thirst. - Visual pathway: The group of nerves that connect the eye with the brain. - Spinal cord: The column of nerve tissue that runs from the brain stem down the center of the back. It is covered by three thin layers of tissue called membranes. The spinal cord and membranes are surrounded by the vertebrae (back bones). Spinal cord nerves carry messages between the brain and the rest of the body, such as a message from the brain to cause muscles to move or a message from the skin to the brain to feel touch.
What causes Childhood Astrocytomas ?
The cause of most childhood brain tumors is not known.
Who is at risk for Childhood Astrocytomas? ?
Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. Possible risk factors for astrocytoma include: - Past radiation therapy to the brain. - Having certain genetic disorders, such as neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) or tuberous sclerosis.
What are the symptoms of Childhood Astrocytomas ?
The signs and symptoms of astrocytomas are not the same in every child. Signs and symptoms depend on the following: - Where the tumor forms in the brain or spinal cord. - The size of the tumor. - How fast the tumor grows. - The child's age and development. Some tumors do not cause signs or symptoms. Signs and symptoms may be caused by childhood astrocytomas or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: - Morning headache or headache that goes away after vomiting. - Nausea and vomiting. - Vision, hearing, and speech problems. - Loss of balance and trouble walking. - Worsening handwriting or slow speech. - Weakness or change in feeling on one side of the body. - Unusual sleepiness. - More or less energy than usual. - Change in personality or behavior. - Seizures. - Weight loss or weight gain for no known reason. - Increase in the size of the head (in infants).
How to diagnose Childhood Astrocytomas ?
Tests that examine the brain and spinal cord are used to detect (find) childhood astrocytomas. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health. This includes checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Neurological exam : A series of questions and tests to check the brain, spinal cord, and nerve function. The exam checks a persons mental status, coordination, and ability to walk normally, and how well the muscles, senses, and reflexes work. This may also be called a neuro exam or a neurologic exam. - Visual field exam: An exam to check a persons field of vision (the total area in which objects can be seen). This test measures both central vision (how much a person can see when looking straight ahead) and peripheral vision (how much a person can see in all other directions while staring straight ahead). The eyes are tested one at a time. The eye not being tested is covered. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) with gadolinium : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of the brain and spinal cord. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). Sometimes magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is done during the same MRI scan to look at the chemical makeup of the brain tissue. Childhood astrocytomas are usually diagnosed and removed in surgery. If doctors think there may be an astrocytoma, a biopsy may be done to remove a sample of tissue. For tumors in the brain, a part of the skull is removed and a needle is used to remove tissue. Sometimes, the needle is guided by a computer. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are found, the doctor may remove as much tumor as safely possible during the same surgery. Because it can be hard to tell the difference between types of brain tumors, you may want to have your child's tissue sample checked by a pathologist who has experience in diagnosing brain tumors. The following test may be done on the tissue that was removed: - Immunohistochemistry : A test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of tissue. The antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the tissue to light up under a microscope. This type of test may be used to tell the difference between different types of cancer. An MIB-1 test is a type of immunohistochemistry that checks tumor tissue for an antigen called MIB-1. This may show how fast a tumor is growing. Sometimes tumors form in a place that makes them hard to remove. If removing the tumor may cause severe physical, emotional, or learning problems, a biopsy is done and more treatment is given after the biopsy. Children who have NF1 may form a low-grade astrocytoma in the area of the brain that controls vision and may not need a biopsy. If the tumor does not continue to grow or symptoms do not occur, surgery to remove the tumor may not be needed.
What is the outlook for Childhood Astrocytomas ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - Whether the tumor is a low-grade or high-grade astrocytoma. - Where the tumor has formed in the CNS and if it has spread to nearby tissue or to other parts of the body. - How fast the tumor is growing. - The child's age. - Whether cancer cells remain after surgery. - Whether there are changes in certain genes. - Whether the child has NF1 or tuberous sclerosis. - Whether the child has diencephalic syndrome (a condition which slows physical growth). - Whether the child has intracranial hypertension (cerebrospinal fluid pressure within the skull is high) at the time of diagnosis. - Whether the astrocytoma has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). For recurrent astrocytoma, prognosis and treatment depend on how much time passed between the time treatment ended and the time the astrocytoma recurred.
What are the stages of Childhood Astrocytomas ?
  - The grade of the tumor is used to plan cancer treatment. - Low-grade astrocytomas - High-grade astrocytomas - An MRI is done after surgery. The grade of the tumor is used to plan cancer treatment. Staging is the process used to find out how much cancer there is and if cancer has spread. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. There is no standard staging system for childhood astrocytoma. Treatment is based on the following: - Whether the tumor is low grade or high grade. - Whether the tumor is newly diagnosed or recurrent (has come back after treatment). The grade of the tumor describes how abnormal the cancer cells look under a microscope and how quickly the tumor is likely to grow and spread. The following grades are used: Low-grade astrocytomas Low-grade astrocytomas are slow-growing and rarely spread to other parts of the brain and spinal cord or other parts of the body. There are many types of low-grade astrocytomas. Low-grade astrocytomas can be either: - Grade I tumors pilocytic astrocytoma, subependymal giant cell tumor, or angiocentric glioma. - Grade II tumors diffuse astrocytoma, pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, or choroid glioma of the third ventricle. Children who have neurofibromatosis type 1 may have more than one low-grade tumor in the brain. Children who have tuberous sclerosis have an increased risk of subependymal giant cell astrocytoma. High-grade astrocytomas High-grade astrocytomas are fast-growing and often spread within the brain and spinal cord. There are several types of high-grade astrocytomas. High grade astrocytomas can be either: - Grade III tumors anaplastic astrocytoma or anaplastic pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma. - Grade IV tumors glioblastoma or diffuse midline glioma. Childhood astrocytomas usually do not spread to other parts of the body. An MRI is done after surgery. An MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is done in the first few days after surgery. This is to find out how much tumor, if any, remains after surgery and to plan further treatment.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Childhood Astrocytomas ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Other drug therapy Lenalidomide is a type of angiogenesis inhibitor. It prevents the growth of new blood vessels that are needed by a tumor to grow. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What are the treatments for Childhood Astrocytomas ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with childhood astrocytoma. - Children with astrocytomas should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating childhood brain tumors. - Childhood brain tumors may cause signs or symptoms that begin before the cancer is diagnosed and continue for months or years. - Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. - Six types of treatment are used: - Surgery - Observation - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant - Targeted therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Other drug therapy - If fluid builds up around the brain and spinal cord, a cerebrospinal fluid diversion procedure may be done. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with childhood astrocytoma. Different types of treatment are available for children with astrocytomas. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Children with astrocytomas should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating childhood brain tumors. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other healthcare providers who are experts in treating children with brain tumors and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. These may include the following specialists: - Pediatrician. - Pediatric neurosurgeon. - Neurologist. - Neuropathologist. - Neuroradiologist. - Rehabilitation specialist. - Radiation oncologist. - Endocrinologist. - Psychologist. Childhood brain tumors may cause signs or symptoms that begin before the cancer is diagnosed and continue for months or years. Signs or symptoms caused by the tumor may begin before diagnosis. These signs or symptoms may continue for months or years. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about signs or symptoms caused by the tumor that may continue after treatment. Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin during or after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include the following: - Physical problems. - Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. - Second cancers (new types of cancer). Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the effects cancer treatment can have on your child. (See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information.) Six types of treatment are used: Surgery Surgery is used to diagnose and treat childhood astrocytoma, as discussed in the General Information section of this summary. If cancer cells remain after surgery, further treatment depends on: - Where the remaining cancer cells are. - The grade of the tumor. - The age of the child. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that remain. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Observation Observation is closely monitoring a patients condition without giving any treatment until signs or symptoms appear or change. Observation may be used: - If the patient has no symptoms, such as patients with neurofibromatosis type1. - If the tumor is small and is found when a different health problem is being diagnosed or treated. - After the tumor is removed by surgery until signs or symptoms appear or change. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. Certain ways of giving radiation therapy can help keep radiation from damaging nearby healthy tissue. These types of radiation therapy include the following: - Conformal radiation therapy: Conformal radiation therapy is a type of external radiation therapy that uses a computer to make a 3-dimensional (3-D) picture of the tumor and shapes the radiation beams to fit the tumor. - Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT): IMRT is a type of 3-dimensional (3-D) external radiation therapy that uses a computer to make pictures of the size and shape of the tumor. Thin beams of radiation of different intensities (strengths) are aimed at the tumor from many angles. - Stereotactic radiation therapy: Stereotactic radiation therapy is a type of external radiation therapy. A rigid head frame is attached to the skull to keep the head still during the radiation treatment. A machine aims radiation directly at the tumor. The total dose of radiation is divided into several smaller doses given over several days. This procedure is also called stereotactic external-beam radiation therapy and stereotaxic radiation therapy. - Proton beam radiation therapy: Proton-beam therapy is a type of high-energy, external radiation therapy. A radiation therapy machine aims streams of protons (tiny, invisible, positively-charged particles) at the cancer cells to kill them. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of tumor and where the tumor formed in the brain or spinal cord. External radiation therapy is used to treat childhood astrocytomas. Radiation therapy to the brain can affect growth and development, especially in young children. For children younger than 3 years, chemotherapy may be given instead, to delay or reduce the need for radiation therapy. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Combination chemotherapy is the use of more than one anticancer drug. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type of tumor and where the tumor formed in the brain or spinal cord. Systemic combination chemotherapy is used in the treatment of children with astrocytoma. High-dose chemotherapy may be used in the treatment of children with newly diagnosed high-grade astrocytoma. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant is a way of giving high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen and stored. After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the body's blood cells. For high-grade astrocytoma that has come back after treatment, high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant is used if there is only a small amount of tumor. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. There are different types of targeted therapy: - Monoclonal antibody therapy uses antibodies made in the laboratory, from a single type of immune system cell, to stop cancer cells. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion into a vein. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. There are different types of monoclonal antibody therapy: - Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitor therapy: Cancer cells make a substance called VEGF, which causes new blood vessels to form (angiogenesis) and helps the cancer grow. VEGF inhibitors block VEGF and stop new blood vessels from forming. This may kill cancer cells because they need new blood vessels to grow. Bevacizumab is a VEGF inhibitor and angiogenesis inhibitor being used to treat childhood astrocytoma. - Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the bodys immune responses in check. When PD-1 attaches to another protein called PDL-1 on a cancer cell, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. PD-1 inhibitors attach to PDL-1 and allow the T cells to kill cancer cells. PD-1 inhibitors are being studied to treat high-grade astrocytoma that has recurred. - Protein kinase inhibitors work in different ways. There are several kinds of protein kinase inhibitors. - mTOR inhibitors stop cells from dividing and may prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. Everolimus and sirolimus are mTOR inhibitors used to treat childhood subependymal giant cell astrocytomas. mTOR inhibitors also are being studied to treat low-grade astrocytoma that has recurred. - BRAF inhibitors block proteins needed for cell growth and may kill cancer cells. The BRAF inhibitor dabrafenib is being studied to treat low-grade astrocytoma that has recurred. Vemurafenib and dabrafenib have been used to treat high-grade astrocytomas that have recurred but more study is needed to know how well they work in children. - MEK inhibitors block proteins needed for cell growth and may kill cancer cells. MEK inhibitors such as selumetinib are being studied to treat low-grade astrocytoma that has recurred. See Drugs Approved for Brain Tumors for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Other drug therapy Lenalidomide is a type of angiogenesis inhibitor. It prevents the growth of new blood vessels that are needed by a tumor to grow. If fluid builds up around the brain and spinal cord, a cerebrospinal fluid diversion procedure may be done. Cerebrospinal fluid diversion is a method used to drain fluid that has built up around the brain and spinal cord. A shunt (long, thin tube) is placed in a ventricle (fluid-filled space) of the brain and threaded under the skin to another part of the body, usually the abdomen. The shunt carries extra fluid away from the brain so it may be absorbed elsewhere in the body. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. (See the General Information section for a list of tests.) Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Regular MRIs will continue to be done after treatment has ended. The results of the MRI can show if your child's condition has changed or if the astrocytoma has recurred (come back). If the results of the MRI show a mass in the brain, a biopsy may be done to find out if it is made up of dead tumor cells or if new cancer cells are growing. Treatment Options for Childhood Astrocytomas Newly Diagnosed Childhood Low-Grade Astrocytomas When the tumor is first diagnosed, treatment for childhood low-grade astrocytoma depends on where the tumor is, and is usually surgery. An MRI is done after surgery to see if there is tumor remaining. If the tumor was completely removed by surgery, more treatment may not be needed and the child is closely watched to see if signs or symptoms appear or change. This is called observation. If there is tumor remaining after surgery, treatment may include the following: - Observation. - A second surgery to remove the tumor. - Radiation therapy, which may include conformal radiation therapy, intensity-modulated radiation therapy, proton beam radiation therapy, or stereotactic radiation therapy, when the tumor begins to grow again. - Combination chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy. In some cases, observation is used for children who have a visual pathway glioma. In other cases, treatment may include surgery to remove the tumor, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy. A goal of treatment is to save as much vision as possible. The effect of tumor growth on the child's vision will be closely followed during treatment. Children with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) may not need treatment unless the tumor grows or signs or symptoms, such as vision problems, appear. When the tumor grows or signs or symptoms appear, treatment may include surgery to remove the tumor, radiation therapy, and/or chemotherapy. Children with tuberous sclerosis may develop benign (not cancer) tumors in the brain called subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs). Targeted therapy with everolimus or sirolimus may be used instead of surgery, to shrink the tumors. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with childhood low-grade untreated astrocytoma or other tumor of glial origin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Recurrent Childhood Low-Grade Astrocytomas When low-grade astrocytoma recurs after treatment, it usually comes back where the tumor first formed. Before more cancer treatment is given, imaging tests, biopsy, or surgery are done to find out if there is cancer and how much there is. Treatment of recurrent childhood low-grade astrocytoma may include the following: - A second surgery to remove the tumor, if surgery was the only treatment given when the tumor was first diagnosed. - Radiation therapy to the tumor only, if radiation therapy was not used when the tumor was first diagnosed. Conformal radiation therapy may be given. - Chemotherapy, if the tumor recurred where it cannot be removed by surgery or the patient had radiation therapy when the tumor was first diagnosed. - Targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody (bevacizumab) with or without chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of targeted therapy with a BRAF inhibitor (dabrafenib), an mTOR inhibitor (everolimus), or a MEK inhibitor (selumetinib). - A clinical trial of lenalidomide. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent childhood astrocytoma or other tumor of glial origin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Newly Diagnosed Childhood High-Grade Astrocytomas Treatment of childhood high-grade astrocytoma may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor, followed by chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with childhood high-grade untreated astrocytoma or other tumor of glial origin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Recurrent Childhood High-Grade Astrocytomas When high-grade astrocytoma recurs after treatment, it usually comes back where the tumor first formed. Before more cancer treatment is given, imaging tests, biopsy, or surgery are done to find out if there is cancer and how much there is. Treatment of recurrent childhood high-grade astrocytoma may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor. - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant. - Targeted therapy with a BRAF inhibitor (vemurafenib or dabrafenib). - A clinical trial of targeted therapy with an immune checkpoint inhibitor. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent childhood astrocytoma or other tumor of glial origin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. .
What is are Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor ?
  - Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain. - Certain genetic changes may increase the risk of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. - The signs and symptoms of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor are not the same in every patient. - Tests that examine the brain and spinal cord are used to detect (find) CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. - Childhood atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is diagnosed and may be removed in surgery. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain. Central nervous system (CNS) atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is a very rare, fast-growing tumor of the brain and spinal cord. It usually occurs in children aged three years and younger, although it can occur in older children and adults. About half of these tumors form in the cerebellum or brain stem. The cerebellum is the part of the brain that controls movement, balance, and posture. The brain stem controls breathing, heart rate, and the nerves and muscles used in seeing, hearing, walking, talking, and eating. AT/RT may also be found in other parts of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). This summary describes the treatment of primary brain tumors (tumors that begin in the brain). Treatment for metastatic brain tumors, which are tumors formed by cancer cells that begin in other parts of the body and spread to the brain, is not covered in this summary. For more information, see the PDQ summary on Childhood Brain and Spinal Cord Tumors Treatment Overview about the different types of childhood brain and spinal cord tumors. Brain tumors can occur in both children and adults; however, treatment for children may be different than treatment for adults. See the PDQ treatment summary on Adult Central Nervous System Tumors Treatment for more information.
Who is at risk for Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor? ?
Certain genetic changes may increase the risk of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. Anything that increases the risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor may be linked to changes in the tumor suppressor genes SMARCB1 or SMARCA4. Genes of this type make a protein that helps control cell growth. Changes in the DNA of tumor suppressor genes like SMARCB1 or SMARCA4 may lead to cancer. Changes in the SMARCB1 or SMARCA4 genes may be inherited (passed on from parents to offspring). When this gene change is inherited, tumors may form in two parts of the body at the same time (for example, in the brain and the kidney). For patients with AT/RT, genetic counseling (a discussion with a trained professional about inherited diseases and a possible need for gene testing) may be recommended.
What are the symptoms of Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor ?
The signs and symptoms of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor are not the same in every patient. Signs and symptoms depend on the following: - The child's age. - Where the tumor has formed. Because atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is fast growing, signs and symptoms may develop quickly and get worse over a period of days or weeks. Signs and symptoms may be caused by AT/RT or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: - Morning headache or headache that goes away after vomiting. - Nausea and vomiting. - Unusual sleepiness or change in activity level. - Loss of balance, lack of coordination, or trouble walking. - Increase in head size (in infants).
How to diagnose Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor ?
Tests that examine the brain and spinal cord are used to detect (find) CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient's health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Neurological exam : A series of questions and tests to check the brain, spinal cord, and nerve function. The exam checks a persons mental status, coordination, and ability to walk normally, and how well the muscles, senses, and reflexes work. This may also be called a neuro exam or a neurologic exam. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the brain and spinal cord. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Lumbar puncture : A procedure used to collect cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the spinal column. This is done by placing a needle between two bones in the spine and into the CSF around the spinal cord and removing a sample of fluid. The sample of CSF is checked under a microscope for signs of tumor cells. The sample may also be checked for the amounts of protein and glucose. A higher than normal amount of protein or lower than normal amount of glucose may be a sign of a tumor. This procedure is also called an LP or spinal tap. - SMARCB1 and SMARCA4 gene testing: A laboratory test in which a sample of blood or tissue is tested for the SMARCB1 and SMARCA4 genes. Childhood atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is diagnosed and may be removed in surgery. If doctors think there might be a brain tumor, a biopsy may be done to remove a sample of tissue. For tumors in the brain, the biopsy is done by removing part of the skull and using a needle to remove a sample of tissue. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are found, the doctor may remove as much tumor as safely possible during the same surgery. The pathologist checks the cancer cells to find out the type of brain tumor. It is often difficult to completely remove AT/RT because of where the tumor is in the brain and because it may already have spread at the time of diagnosis. The following test may be done on the sample of tissue that is removed: - Immunohistochemistry : A test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of tissue. The antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the tissue to light up under a microscope. This test is used to tell the difference between AT/RT and other brain tumors.
What is the outlook for Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - Whether there are certain inherited gene changes. - The age of the child. - The amount of tumor remaining after surgery. - Whether the cancer has spread to other parts of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) or to the kidney at the time of diagnosis.
What are the stages of Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor ?
  - There is no standard staging system for central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. There is no standard staging system for central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. The extent or spread of cancer is usually described as stages. There is no standard staging system for central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. For treatment, this tumor is grouped as newly diagnosed or recurrent. Treatment depends on the following: - The age of the child. - How much cancer remains after surgery to remove the tumor. Results from the following procedure are also used to plan treatment: - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs, such as the kidney, and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. This procedure is done to check for tumors that may also have formed in the kidney.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to attack specific cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. Targeted therapy is being studied in the treatment of recurrent childhood central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What are the treatments for Childhood Central Nervous System Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. - Children with atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating cancer in children. - Childhood brain tumors may cause signs or symptoms that begin before the cancer is diagnosed and continue for months or years. - Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. - Four types of treatment are used: - Surgery - Chemotherapy - Radiation therapy - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Targeted therapy - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. Different types of treatment are available for patients with central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT). Treatment for AT/RT is usually within a clinical trial. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Choosing the most appropriate cancer treatment is a decision that ideally involves the patient, family, and health care team. Children with atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating cancer in children. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health care providers who are experts in treating children with central nervous system cancer and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. These may include the following specialists: - Pediatrician. - Pediatric neurosurgeon. - Radiation oncologist. - Neurologist. - Pediatric nurse specialist. - Rehabilitation specialist. - Psychologist. - Social worker. - Geneticist or genetic counselor. Childhood brain tumors may cause signs or symptoms that begin before the cancer is diagnosed and continue for months or years. Signs or symptoms caused by the tumor may begin before diagnosis. These signs or symptoms may continue for months or years. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about signs or symptoms caused by the tumor that may continue after treatment. Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin during or after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include the following: - Physical problems. - Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. - Second cancers (new types of cancer). Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the effects cancer treatment can have on your child. (See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information). Four types of treatment are used: Surgery Surgery is used to diagnose and treat CNS atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. See the General Information section of this summary. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, most patients will be given chemotherapy and possibly radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. - When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect tumor cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Regular doses of anticancer drugs given by mouth or vein to treat brain and spinal cord tumors cannot cross the blood-brain barrier and reach the tumor. Anticancer drugs injected into the cerebrospinal fluid are able to reach the tumor. This is called intrathecal chemotherapy. - When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach tumor cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). High doses of some anticancer drugs given into a vein can cross the blood-brain barrier and reach the tumor. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of tumor being treated and whether it has spread. External radiation therapy may be given to the brain and spinal cord. Because radiation therapy can affect growth and brain development in young children, especially children who are three years old or younger, the dose of radiation therapy may be lower than in older children. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant is a method of giving high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen and stored. After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the bodys blood cells. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to attack specific cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. Targeted therapy is being studied in the treatment of recurrent childhood central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Newly Diagnosed Childhood CNS Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor   - There is no standard treatment for patients with central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. - Combinations of treatments are used for patients with atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. There is no standard treatment for patients with central nervous system atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. Combinations of treatments are used for patients with atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor. Because atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is fast-growing, a combination of treatments is usually given. After surgery to remove the tumor, treatments for AT/RT may include combinations of the following: - Chemotherapy. - Radiation therapy. - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant. Clinical trials of new treatments should be considered for patients with newly diagnosed atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor
What is are Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
  - Childhood brain stem glioma is a disease in which benign (noncancer) or malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain stem. - Brain tumors may be benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer). - There are two types of brain stem gliomas in children. - The cause of most childhood brain tumors is unknown. - The signs and symptoms of brain stem glioma are not the same in every child. - Tests that examine the brain are used to detect (find) childhood brain stem glioma. - A biopsy may be done to diagnose certain types of brain stem glioma. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Childhood brain stem glioma is a disease in which benign (noncancer) or malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the brain stem. Gliomas are tumors formed from glial cells. Glial cells in the brain hold nerve cells in place, bring food and oxygen to them, and help protect them from disease, such as infection. The brain stem is the part of the brain connected to the spinal cord. It is in the lowest part of the brain, just above the back of the neck. The brain stem is the part of the brain that controls breathing, heart rate, and the nerves and muscles used in seeing, hearing, walking, talking, and eating. Most childhood brain stem gliomas are pontine gliomas, which form in a part of the brain stem called the pons. Brain tumors are the third most common type of cancer in children. This summary refers to the treatment of primary brain tumors (tumors that begin in the brain). Treatment for metastatic brain tumors, which are tumors formed by cancer cells that begin in other parts of the body and spread to the brain, is not discussed in this summary. Brain tumors can occur in both children and adults; however, treatment for children may be different than treatment for adults. See the following PDQ treatment summaries for more information: - Childhood Brain and Spinal Cord Tumors Treatment Overview - Adult Central Nervous System Tumors Treatment Brain tumors may be benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer). Benign brain tumors grow and press on nearby areas of the brain. They rarely spread into other tissues. Malignant brain tumors are likely to grow quickly and spread into other brain tissue. When a tumor grows into or presses on an area of the brain, it may stop that part of the brain from working the way it should. Both benign and malignant brain tumors can cause signs and symptoms and need treatment. There are two types of brain stem gliomas in children. Childhood brain stem glioma is either a diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) or a focal glioma. - DIPG is a high-grade tumor that is fast-growing and spreads all through the brain stem. It is hard to treat and has a poor prognosis (chance of recovery). Children younger than 3 years diagnosed with DIPG may have a better prognosis than children who are 3 years and older. - A focal glioma is slow-growing and is in one area of the brain stem. It is easier to treat than DIPG and has a better prognosis.
What causes Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
The cause of most childhood brain tumors is unknown.
Who is at risk for Childhood Brain Stem Glioma? ?
Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. Possible risk factors for brain stem glioma include: - Having certain genetic disorders, such as neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
What are the symptoms of Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
The signs and symptoms of brain stem glioma are not the same in every child. Signs and symptoms depend on the following: - Where the tumor forms in the brain. - The size of the tumor and whether it has spread all through the brain stem. - How fast the tumor grows. - The child's age and development. Some tumors do not cause signs or symptoms. Signs and symptoms may be caused by childhood brain stem gliomas or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: - Loss of ability to move one side of the face and/or body. - Loss of balance and trouble walking. - Vision and hearing problems. - Morning headache or headache that goes away after vomiting. - Nausea and vomiting. - Unusual sleepiness. - More or less energy than usual. - Changes in behavior. - Trouble learning in school.
How to diagnose Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
Tests that examine the brain are used to detect (find) childhood brain stem glioma. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Neurological exam : A series of questions and tests to check the brain, spinal cord, and nerve function. The exam checks a persons mental status, coordination, and ability to walk normally, and how well the muscles, senses, and reflexes work. This may also be called a neuro exam or a neurologic exam. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) with gadolinium : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the brain. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - A biopsy may be done to diagnose certain types of brain stem glioma. If the MRI scan looks like the tumor is a DIPG, a biopsy is usually not done and the tumor is not removed. If the MRI scan looks like a focal brain stem glioma, a biopsy may be done. A part of the skull is removed and a needle is used to remove a sample of the brain tissue. Sometimes, the needle is guided by a computer. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are found, the doctor will remove as much tumor as safely possible during the same surgery. The following test may be done on the tissue that was removed: - Immunohistochemistry : A test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of tissue. The antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the tissue to light up under a microscope. This type of test may be used to tell the difference between brain stem glioma and other brain tumors.
What is the outlook for Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis and treatment options depend on: - The type of brain stem glioma. - Where the tumor is found in the brain and if it has spread within the brain stem. - The age of the child when diagnosed. - Whether or not the child has a condition called neurofibromatosis type 1. - Whether the tumor has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
The plan for cancer treatment depends on whether the tumor is in one area of the brain or has spread all through the brain. The plan for cancer treatment depends on whether the tumor is in one area of the brain or has spread all through the brain. Staging is the process used to find out how much cancer there is and if cancer has spread. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. There is no standard staging system for childhood brain stem glioma. Treatment is based on the following: - Whether the tumor is newly diagnosed or recurrent (has come back after treatment). - The type of tumor (either a diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma or a focal glioma).
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What are the treatments for Childhood Brain Stem Glioma ?
  - There are different types of treatment for children with brain stem glioma. - Children with brain stem glioma should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating childhood brain tumors. - Childhood brain stem gliomas may cause signs or symptoms that begin before the cancer is diagnosed and continue for months or years. - Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. - Six types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Cerebrospinal fluid diversion - Observation - Targeted therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for children with brain stem glioma. Different types of treatment are available for children with brain stem glioma. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Children with brain stem glioma should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating childhood brain tumors. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health care providers who are experts in treating children with brain tumors and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. These may include the following specialists: - Pediatrician. - Neurosurgeon. - Neuropathologist. - Radiation oncologist. - Neuro-oncologist. - Neurologist. - Rehabilitation specialist. - Neuroradiologist. - Endocrinologist. - Psychologist. Childhood brain stem gliomas may cause signs or symptoms that begin before the cancer is diagnosed and continue for months or years. Childhood brain stem gliomas may cause signs or symptoms that continue for months or years. Signs or symptoms caused by the tumor may begin before diagnosis. Signs or symptoms caused by treatment may begin during or right after treatment. Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. These are called late effects. Late effects may include the following: - Physical problems. - Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. - Second cancers (new types of cancer). Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the effects cancer treatment can have on your child. (See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information). Six types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery may be used to diagnose and treat childhood brain stem glioma as discussed in the General Information section of this summary. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat DIPG. External and/or internal radiation therapy may be used to treat focal brain stem gliomas. Several months after radiation therapy to the brain, imaging tests may show changes to the brain tissue. These changes may be caused by the radiation therapy or may mean the tumor is growing. It is important to be sure the tumor is growing before any more treatment is given. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly in the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type of the cancer being treated. Because radiation therapy to the brain can affect growth and brain development in young children, clinical trials are studying ways of using chemotherapy to delay or reduce the need for radiation therapy. Cerebrospinal fluid diversion Cerebrospinal fluid diversion is a method used to drain fluid that has built up in the brain. A shunt (long, thin tube) is placed in a ventricle (fluid-filled space) of the brain and threaded under the skin to another part of the body, usually the abdomen. The shunt carries extra fluid away from the brain so it may be absorbed elsewhere in the body. Observation Observation is closely monitoring a patients condition without giving any treatment until signs or symptoms appear or change. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Some focal brain stem gliomas that cannot be removed by surgery may be treated with BRAF kinase inhibitor therapy. BRAF kinase inhibitors block the BRAF protein. BRAF proteins help control cell growth and may be mutated (changed) in some types of brain stem glioma. Blocking mutated BRAF kinase proteins may help keep cancer cells from growing. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. If the results of imaging tests done after treatment show a mass in the brain, a biopsy may be done to find out if it is made up of dead tumor cells or if new cancer cells are growing. In children who are expected to live a long time, regular MRIs may be done to see if the cancer has come back. Treatment Options for Childhood Brain Stem Glioma Newly Diagnosed Childhood Brain Stem Glioma Newly diagnosed childhood brain stem glioma is a tumor for which no treatment has been given. The child may have received drugs or treatment to relieve signs or symptoms caused by the tumor. Standard treatment of diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) may include the following: - Radiation therapy. - Chemotherapy (in infants). Standard treatment of focal glioma may include the following: - Surgery that may be followed by chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy. - Observation for small tumors that grow slowly. Cerebrospinal fluid diversion may be done when there is extra fluid in the brain. - Internal radiation therapy with radioactive seeds, with or without chemotherapy, when the tumor cannot be removed by surgery. - Targeted therapy with a BRAF kinase inhibitor, for certain tumors that cannot be removed by surgery. Treatment of brain stem glioma in children with neurofibromatosis type 1 may be observation. The tumors are slow-growing in these children and may not need specific treatment for years. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with untreated childhood brain stem glioma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Progressive or Recurrent Childhood Brain Stem Glioma When cancer does not get better with treatment or comes back, palliative care is an important part of the child's treatment plan. It includes physical, psychological, social, and spiritual support for the child and family. The goal of palliative care is to help control symptoms and give the child the best quality of life possible. Parents may not be sure about whether to continue treatment or what kind of treatment is best for their child. The healthcare team can give parents information to help them make these decisions. There is no standard treatment for progressive or recurrent diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma. The child may be treated in a clinical trial of a new treatment. Treatment of recurrent focal childhood brain stem glioma may include the following: - A second surgery to remove the tumor. - External radiation therapy. - Chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent childhood brain stem glioma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. .
What is are Adult Primary Liver Cancer ?
  - Adult primary liver cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the liver. - There are two types of adult primary liver cancer. - Having hepatitis or cirrhosis can affect the risk of adult primary liver cancer. - Signs and symptoms of adult primary liver cancer include a lump or pain on the right side. - Tests that examine the liver and the blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose adult primary liver cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Adult primary liver cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the liver. The liver is one of the largest organs in the body. It has four lobes and fills the upper right side of the abdomen inside the rib cage. Three of the many important functions of the liver are: - To filter harmful substances from the blood so they can be passed from the body in stools and urine. - To make bile to help digest fat that comes from food. - To store glycogen (sugar), which the body uses for energy. There are two types of adult primary liver cancer. The two types of adult primary liver cancer are: - Hepatocellular carcinoma. - Cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer). (See the PDQ summary on Bile Duct Cancer Treatment for more information.) The most common type of adult primary liver cancer is hepatocellular carcinoma. This type of liver cancer is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. This summary is about the treatment of primary liver cancer (cancer that begins in the liver). Treatment of cancer that begins in other parts of the body and spreads to the liver is not covered in this summary. Primary liver cancer can occur in both adults and children. However, treatment for children is different than treatment for adults. (See the PDQ summary on Childhood Liver Cancer Treatment for more information.)
Who is at risk for Adult Primary Liver Cancer? ?
Having hepatitis or cirrhosis can affect the risk of adult primary liver cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. The following are risk factors for adult primary liver cancer: - Having hepatitis B or hepatitis C. Having both hepatitis B and hepatitis C increases the risk even more. - Having cirrhosis, which can be caused by: - hepatitis (especially hepatitis C); or - drinking large amounts of alcohol for many years or being an alcoholic. - Having metabolic syndrome, a set of conditions that occur together, including extra fat around the abdomen, high blood sugar, high blood pressure, high levels of triglycerides and low levels of high-density lipoproteins in the blood. - Having liver injury that is long-lasting, especially if it leads to cirrhosis. - Having hemochromatosis, a condition in which the body takes up and stores more iron than it needs. The extra iron is stored in the liver, heart, and pancreas - Eating foods tainted with aflatoxin (poison from a fungus that can grow on foods, such as grains and nuts, that have not been stored properly).
What are the symptoms of Adult Primary Liver Cancer ?
Signs and symptoms of adult primary liver cancer include a lump or pain on the right side. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by adult primary liver cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - A hard lump on the right side just below the rib cage. - Discomfort in the upper abdomen on the right side. - A swollen abdomen. - Pain near the right shoulder blade or in the back. - Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes). - Easy bruising or bleeding. - Unusual tiredness or weakness. - Nausea and vomiting. - Loss of appetite or feelings of fullness after eating a small meal. - Weight loss for no known reason. - Pale, chalky bowel movements and dark urine. - Fever.
How to diagnose Adult Primary Liver Cancer ?
Tests that examine the liver and the blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose adult primary liver cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Serum tumor marker test : A procedure in which a sample of blood is examined to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs, tissues, or tumor cells in the body. Certain substances are linked to specific types of cancer when found in increased levels in the blood. These are called tumor markers. An increased level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in the blood may be a sign of liver cancer. Other cancers and certain noncancerous conditions, including cirrhosis and hepatitis, may also increase AFP levels. Sometimes the AFP level is normal even when there is liver cancer. - Liver function tests : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by the liver. A higher than normal amount of a substance can be a sign of liver cancer. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the abdomen, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. Images may be taken at three different times after the dye is injected, to get the best picture of abnormal areas in the liver. This is called triple-phase CT. A spiral or helical CT scan makes a series of very detailed pictures of areas inside the body using an x-ray machine that scans the body in a spiral path. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the liver. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). To create detailed pictures of blood vessels in and near the liver, dye is injected into a vein. This procedure is called MRA (magnetic resonance angiography). Images may be taken at three different times after the dye is injected, to get the best picture of abnormal areas in the liver. This is called triple-phase MRI. - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. Procedures used to collect the sample of cells or tissues include the following: - Fine-needle aspiration biopsy : The removal of cells, tissue or fluid using a thin needle. - Core needle biopsy : The removal of cells or tissue using a slightly wider needle. - Laparoscopy : A surgical procedure to look at the organs inside the abdomen to check for signs of disease. Small incisions (cuts) are made in the wall of the abdomen and a laparoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted into one of the incisions. Another instrument is inserted through the same or another incision to remove the tissue samples. A biopsy is not always needed to diagnose adult primary liver cancer.
What is the outlook for Adult Primary Liver Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (the size of the tumor, whether it affects part or all of the liver, or has spread to other places in the body). - How well the liver is working. - The patients general health, including whether there is cirrhosis of the liver.
What are the stages of Adult Primary Liver Cancer ?
  - After adult primary liver cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the liver or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer Staging System may be used to stage adult primary liver cancer. - The following groups are used to plan treatment. - BCLC stages 0, A, and B - BCLC stages C and D After adult primary liver cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the liver or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the liver or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if primary liver cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually liver cancer cells. The disease is metastatic liver cancer, not lung cancer. The Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer Staging System may be used to stage adult primary liver cancer. There are several staging systems for liver cancer. The Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) Staging System is widely used and is described below. This system is used to predict the patient's chance of recovery and to plan treatment, based on the following: - Whether the cancer has spread within the liver or to other parts of the body. - How well the liver is working. - The general health and wellness of the patient. - The symptoms caused by the cancer. The BCLC staging system has five stages: - Stage 0: Very early - Stage A: Early - Stage B: Intermediate - Stage C: Advanced - Stage D: End-stage The following groups are used to plan treatment. BCLC stages 0, A, and B Treatment to cure the cancer is given for BCLC stages 0, A, and B. BCLC stages C and D Treatment to relieve the symptoms caused by liver cancer and improve the patient's quality of life is given for BCLC stages C and D. Treatments are not likely to cure the cancer.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Adult Primary Liver Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What are the treatments for Adult Primary Liver Cancer ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with adult primary liver cancer. - Patients with liver cancer are treated by a team of specialists who are experts in treating liver cancer. - Seven types of standard treatment are used: - Surveillance - Surgery - Liver transplant - Ablation therapy - Embolization therapy - Targeted therapy - Radiation therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with adult primary liver cancer. Different types of treatments are available for patients with adult primary liver cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Patients with liver cancer are treated by a team of specialists who are experts in treating liver cancer. The patient's treatment will be overseen by a medical oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating people with cancer. The medical oncologist may refer the patient to other health professionals who have special training in treating patients with liver cancer. These may include the following specialists: - Hepatologist (specialist in liver disease). - Surgical oncologist. - Transplant surgeon. - Radiation oncologist. - Interventional radiologist (a specialist who diagnoses and treats diseases using imaging and the smallest incisions possible). - Pathologist. Seven types of standard treatment are used: Surveillance Surveillance for lesions smaller than 1 centimeter found during screening. Follow-up every three months is common. Surgery A partial hepatectomy (surgery to remove the part of the liver where cancer is found) may be done. A wedge of tissue, an entire lobe, or a larger part of the liver, along with some of the healthy tissue around it is removed. The remaining liver tissue takes over the functions of the liver and may regrow. Liver transplant In a liver transplant, the entire liver is removed and replaced with a healthy donated liver. A liver transplant may be done when the disease is in the liver only and a donated liver can be found. If the patient has to wait for a donated liver, other treatment is given as needed. Ablation therapy Ablation therapy removes or destroys tissue. Different types of ablation therapy are used for liver cancer: - Radiofrequency ablation: The use of special needles that are inserted directly through the skin or through an incision in the abdomen to reach the tumor. High-energy radio waves heat the needles and tumor which kills cancer cells. - Microwave therapy: A type of treatment in which the tumor is exposed to high temperatures created by microwaves. This can damage and kill cancer cells or make them more sensitive to the effects of radiation and certain anticancer drugs. - Percutaneous ethanol injection: A cancer treatment in which a small needle is used to inject ethanol (pure alcohol) directly into a tumor to kill cancer cells. Several treatments may be needed. Usually local anesthesia is used, but if the patient has many tumors in the liver, general anesthesia may be used. - Cryoablation: A treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy cancer cells. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy and cryosurgery. The doctor may use ultrasound to guide the instrument. - Electroporation therapy: A treatment that sends electrical pulses through an electrode placed in a tumor to kill cancer cells. Electroporation therapy is being studied in clinical trials. Embolization therapy Embolization therapy is the use of substances to block or decrease the flow of blood through the hepatic artery to the tumor. When the tumor does not get the oxygen and nutrients it needs, it will not continue to grow. Embolization therapy is used for patients who cannot have surgery to remove the tumor or ablation therapy and whose tumor has not spread outside the liver. The liver receives blood from the hepatic portal vein and the hepatic artery. Blood that comes into the liver from the hepatic portal vein usually goes to the healthy liver tissue. Blood that comes from the hepatic artery usually goes to the tumor. When the hepatic artery is blocked during embolization therapy, the healthy liver tissue continues to receive blood from the hepatic portal vein. There are two main types of embolization therapy: - Transarterial embolization (TAE): A small incision (cut) is made in the inner thigh and a catheter (thin, flexible tube) is inserted and threaded up into the hepatic artery. Once the catheter is in place, a substance that blocks the hepatic artery and stops blood flow to the tumor is injected. - Transarterial chemoembolization (TACE): This procedure is like TAE except an anticancer drug is also given. The procedure can be done by attaching the anticancer drug to small beads that are injected into the hepatic artery or by injecting the anticancer drug through the catheter into the hepatic artery and then injecting the substance to block the hepatic artery. Most of the anticancer drug is trapped near the tumor and only a small amount of the drug reaches other parts of the body. This type of treatment is also called chemoembolization. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Adult liver cancer may be treated with a targeted therapy drug that stops cells from dividing and prevents the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. See Drugs Approved for Liver Cancer for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. Certain ways of giving radiation therapy can help keep radiation from damaging nearby healthy tissue. These types of external radiation therapy include the following: - Conformal radiation therapy: Conformal radiation therapy is a type of external radiation therapy that uses a computer to make a 3-dimensional (3-D) picture of the tumor and shapes the radiation beams to fit the tumor. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor and causes less damage to nearby healthy tissue. - Stereotactic body radiation therapy: Stereotactic body radiation therapy is a type of external radiation therapy. Special equipment is used to place the patient in the same position for each radiation treatment. Once a day for several days, a radiation machine aims a larger than usual dose of radiation directly at the tumor. By having the patient in the same position for each treatment, there is less damage to nearby healthy tissue. This procedure is also called stereotactic external-beam radiation therapy and stereotaxic radiation therapy. - Proton beam radiation therapy: Proton-beam therapy is a type of high-energy, external radiation therapy. A radiation therapy machine aims streams of protons (tiny, invisible, positively-charged particles) at the cancer cells to kill them. This type of treatment causes less damage to nearby healthy tissue. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat adult primary liver cancer. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Adult Primary Liver Cancer Stages 0, A, and B Adult Primary Liver Cancer Treatment of stages 0, A, and B adult primary liver cancer may include the following: - Surveillance for lesions smaller than 1 centimeter. - Partial hepatectomy. - Total hepatectomy and liver transplant. - Ablation of the tumor using one of the following methods: - Radiofrequency ablation. - Microwave therapy. - Percutaneous ethanol injection. - Cryoablation. - A clinical trial of electroporation therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage 0 adult primary liver cancer (BCLC), stage A adult primary liver cancer (BCLC) and stage B adult primary liver cancer (BCLC). For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stages C and D Adult Primary Liver Cancer Treatment of stages C and D adult primary liver cancer may include the following: - Embolization therapy using one of the following methods: - Transarterial embolization (TAE). - Transarterial chemoembolization (TACE). - Targeted therapy. - Radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of targeted therapy after chemoembolization or combined with chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of new targeted therapy drugs. - A clinical trial of targeted therapy with or without stereotactic body radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of stereotactic body radiation therapy or proton-beam radiation therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage C adult primary liver cancer (BCLC) and stage D adult primary liver cancer (BCLC). For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. 
  - Bile duct cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the bile ducts. - Having colitis or certain liver diseases can increase the risk of bile duct cancer. - Signs of bile duct cancer include jaundice and pain in the abdomen. - Tests that examine the bile ducts and nearby organs are used to detect (find), diagnose, and stage bile duct cancer. - Different procedures may be used to obtain a sample of tissue and diagnose bile duct cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Bile duct cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the bile ducts. A network of tubes, called ducts, connects the liver, gallbladder, and small intestine. This network begins in the liver where many small ducts collect bile (a fluid made by the liver to break down fats during digestion). The small ducts come together to form the right and left hepatic ducts, which lead out of the liver. The two ducts join outside the liver and form the common hepatic duct. The cystic duct connects the gallbladder to the common hepatic duct. Bile from the liver passes through the hepatic ducts, common hepatic duct, and cystic duct and is stored in the gallbladder. When food is being digested, bile stored in the gallbladder is released and passes through the cystic duct to the common bile duct and into the small intestine. Bile duct cancer is also called cholangiocarcinoma. There are two types of bile duct cancer: - Intrahepatic bile duct cancer : This type of cancer forms in the bile ducts inside the liver. Only a small number of bile duct cancers are intrahepatic. Intrahepatic bile duct cancers are also called intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. - Extrahepatic bile duct cancer : The extrahepatic bile duct is made up of the hilum region and the distal region. Cancer can form in either region: - Perihilar bile duct cancer: This type of cancer is found in the hilum region, the area where the right and left bile ducts exit the liver and join to form the common hepatic duct. Perihilar bile duct cancer is also called a Klatskin tumor or perihilar cholangiocarcinoma. - Distal extrahepatic bile duct cancer: This type of cancer is found in the distal region. The distal region is made up of the common bile duct which passes through the pancreas and ends in the small intestine. Distal extrahepatic bile duct cancer is also called extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
Who is at risk for Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma)? ?
Having colitis or certain liver diseases can increase the risk of bile duct cancer. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. People who think they may be at risk should discuss this with their doctor. Risk factors for bile duct cancer include the following conditions: - Primary sclerosing cholangitis (a progressive disease in which the bile ducts become blocked by inflammation and scarring). - Chronic ulcerative colitis. - Cysts in the bile ducts (cysts block the flow of bile and can cause swollen bile ducts, inflammation, and infection). - Infection with a Chinese liver fluke parasite.
What are the symptoms of Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) ?
Signs of bile duct cancer include jaundice and pain in the abdomen. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by bile duct cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Jaundice (yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes). - Dark urine. - Clay colored stool. - Pain in the abdomen. - Fever. - Itchy skin. - Nausea and vomiting. - Weight loss for an unknown reason.
How to diagnose Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) ?
Tests that examine the bile ducts and nearby organs are used to detect (find), diagnose, and stage bile duct cancer. Procedures that make pictures of the bile ducts and the nearby area help diagnose bile duct cancer and show how far the cancer has spread. The process used to find out if cancer cells have spread within and around the bile ducts or to distant parts of the body is called staging. In order to plan treatment, it is important to know if the bile duct cancer can be removed by surgery. Tests and procedures to detect, diagnose, and stage bile duct cancer are usually done at the same time. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Liver function tests : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase released into the blood by the liver. A higher than normal amount of these substances can be a sign of liver disease that may be caused by bile duct cancer. - Laboratory tests : Medical procedures that test samples of tissue, blood, urine, or other substances in the body. These tests help to diagnose disease, plan and check treatment, or monitor the disease over time. - Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA 19-9 tumor marker test : A procedure in which a sample of blood, urine, or tissue is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances made by organs, tissues, or tumor cells in the body. Certain substances are linked to specific types of cancer when found in increased levels in the body. These are called tumor markers. Higher than normal levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA 19-9 may mean there is bile duct cancer. - Ultrasound exam : A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs, such as the abdomen, and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the abdomen, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - MRCP (magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body such as the liver, bile ducts, gallbladder, pancreas, and pancreatic duct. Different procedures may be used to obtain a sample of tissue and diagnose bile duct cancer. Cells and tissues are removed during a biopsy so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. Different procedures may be used to obtain the sample of cells and tissue. The type of procedure used depends on whether the patient is well enough to have surgery. Types of biopsy procedures include the following: - Laparoscopy : A surgical procedure to look at the organs inside the abdomen, such as the bile ducts and liver, to check for signs of cancer. Small incisions (cuts) are made in the wall of the abdomen and a laparoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted into one of the incisions. Other instruments may be inserted through the same or other incisions to perform procedures such as taking tissue samples to be checked for signs of cancer. - Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC): A procedure used to x-ray the liver and bile ducts. A thin needle is inserted through the skin below the ribs and into the liver. Dye is injected into the liver or bile ducts and an x-ray is taken. A sample of tissue is removed and checked for signs of cancer. If the bile duct is blocked, a thin, flexible tube called a stent may be left in the liver to drain bile into the small intestine or a collection bag outside the body. This procedure may be used when a patient cannot have surgery. - Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP): A procedure used to x-ray the ducts (tubes) that carry bile from the liver to the gallbladder and from the gallbladder to the small intestine. Sometimes bile duct cancer causes these ducts to narrow and block or slow the flow of bile, causing jaundice. An endoscope is passed through the mouth and stomach and into the small intestine. Dye is injected through the endoscope (thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing) into the bile ducts and an x-ray is taken. A sample of tissue is removed and checked for signs of cancer. If the bile duct is blocked, a thin tube may be inserted into the duct to unblock it. This tube (or stent) may be left in place to keep the duct open. This procedure may be used when a patient cannot have surgery.
What is the outlook for Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - Whether the cancer is in the upper or lower part of the bile duct system. - The stage of the cancer (whether it affects only the bile ducts or has spread to the liver, lymph nodes, or other places in the body). - Whether the cancer has spread to nearby nerves or veins. - Whether the cancer can be completely removed by surgery. - Whether the patient has other conditions, such as primary sclerosing cholangitis. - Whether the level of CA 19-9 is higher than normal. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). Treatment options may also depend on the symptoms caused by the cancer. Bile duct cancer is usually found after it has spread and can rarely be completely removed by surgery. Palliative therapy may relieve symptoms and improve the patient's quality of life.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Liver transplant In a liver transplant, the entire liver is removed and replaced with a healthy donated liver. A liver transplant may be done in patients with perihilar bile duct cancer. If the patient has to wait for a donated liver, other treatment is given as needed. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What are the stages of Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) ?
  - The results of diagnostic and staging tests are used to find out if cancer cells have spread. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - Stages are used to describe the different types of bile duct cancer. - Intrahepatic bile duct cancer - Perihilar bile duct cancer - Distal extrahepatic bile duct cancer - The following groups are used to plan treatment: - Resectable (localized) bile duct cancer - Unresectable, metastatic, or recurrent bile duct cancer The results of diagnostic and staging tests are used to find out if cancer cells have spread. The process used to find out if cancer has spread to other parts of the body is called staging. For bile duct cancer, the information gathered from tests and procedures is used to plan treatment, including whether the tumor can be removed by surgery. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if bile duct cancer spreads to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually bile duct cancer cells. The disease is metastatic bile duct cancer, not liver cancer. Stages are used to describe the different types of bile duct cancer. Intrahepatic bile duct cancer - Stage 0: Abnormal cells are found in the innermost layer of tissue lining the intrahepatic bile duct. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. - Stage I: There is one tumor that has spread into the intrahepatic bile duct and it has not spread into any blood vessels. - Stage II: There is one tumor that has spread through the wall of the bile duct and into a blood vessel, or there are multiple tumors that may have spread into a blood vessel. - Stage III: The tumor has spread through the tissue that lines the abdominal wall or has spread to organs or tissues near the liver such as the duodenum, colon, and stomach. - Stage IV: Stage IV is divided into stage IVA and stage IVB. - Stage IVA: The cancer has spread along the outside of the intrahepatic bile ducts or the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. - Stage IVB: The cancer has spread to organs in other parts of the body. Perihilar bile duct cancer - Stage 0: Abnormal cells are found in the innermost layer of tissue lining the perihilar bile duct. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. - Stage I: Cancer has formed in the innermost layer of the wall of the perihilar bile duct and has spread into the muscle layer or fibrous tissue layer of the wall. - Stage II: Cancer has spread through the wall of the perihilar bile duct to nearby fatty tissue or to the liver. - Stage III: Stage III is divided into stage IIIA and stage IIIB. - Stage IIIA: Cancer has spread to branches on one side of the hepatic artery or of the portal vein. - Stage IIIB: Cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes. Cancer may have spread into the wall of the perihilar bile duct or through the wall to nearby fatty tissue, the liver, or to branches on one side of the hepatic artery or of the portal vein. - Stage IV: Stage IV is divided into stage IVA and stage IVB. - Stage IVA: Cancer has spread to one or more of the following: - the main part of the portal vein and/or common hepatic artery; - the branches of the portal vein and/or common hepatic artery on both sides; - the right hepatic duct and the left branch of the hepatic artery or of the portal vein; - the left hepatic duct and the right branch of the hepatic artery or of the portal vein. Cancer may have spread to nearby lymph nodes. - Stage IVB: Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in more distant parts of the abdomen, or to organs in other parts of the body. Distal extrahepatic bile duct cancer - Stage 0: Abnormal cells are found in the innermost layer of tissue lining the distal extrahepatic bile duct. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. - Stage I: Stage I is divided into stage IA and stage IB. - Stage IA: Cancer has formed and is found in the distal extrahepatic bile duct wall only. - Stage IB: Cancer has formed and has spread through the wall of the distal extrahepatic bile duct but has not spread to nearby organs. - Stage II: Stage II is divided into stage IIA and stage IIB. - Stage IIA: Cancer has spread from the distal extrahepatic bile duct to the gallbladder, pancreas, duodenum, or other nearby organs. - Stage IIB: Cancer has spread from the distal extrahepatic bile duct to nearby lymph nodes. Cancer may have spread through the wall of the duct or to nearby organs. - Stage III: Cancer has spread to the large vessels that carry blood to the organs in the abdomen. Cancer may have spread to nearby lymph nodes. - Stage IV: Cancer has spread to organs in distant parts of the body. The following groups are used to plan treatment: Resectable (localized) bile duct cancer The cancer is in an area, such as the lower part of the common bile duct or perihilar area, where it can be removed completely by surgery. Unresectable, metastatic, or recurrent bile duct cancer Unresectable cancer cannot be removed completely by surgery. Most patients with bile duct cancer cannot have their cancer completely removed by surgery. Metastasis is the spread of cancer from the primary site (place where it started) to other places in the body. Metastatic bile duct cancer may have spread to the liver, other parts of the abdominal cavity, or to distant parts of the body. Recurrent bile duct cancer is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated. The cancer may come back in the bile ducts, liver, or gallbladder. Less often, it may come back in distant parts of the body.
What are the treatments for Bile Duct Cancer (Cholangiocarcinoma) ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with bile duct cancer. - Three types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Liver transplant - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with bile duct cancer. Different types of treatments are available for patients with bile duct cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Three types of standard treatment are used: Surgery The following types of surgery are used to treat bile duct cancer: - Removal of the bile duct: A surgical procedure to remove part of the bile duct if the tumor is small and in the bile duct only. Lymph nodes are removed and tissue from the lymph nodes is viewed under a microscope to see if there is cancer. - Partial hepatectomy: A surgical procedure in which the part of the liver where cancer is found is removed. The part removed may be a wedge of tissue, an entire lobe, or a larger part of the liver, along with some normal tissue around it. - Whipple procedure: A surgical procedure in which the head of the pancreas, the gallbladder, part of the stomach, part of the small intestine, and the bile duct are removed. Enough of the pancreas is left to make digestive juices and insulin. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the operation, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. It is not yet known whether chemotherapy or radiation therapy given after surgery helps keep the cancer from coming back. The following types of palliative surgery may be done to relieve symptoms caused by a blocked bile duct and improve quality of life: - Biliary bypass: A surgical procedure in which the part of the bile duct before the blockage is connected with part of the bile duct that is past the blockage or to the small intestine. This allows bile to flow to the gallbladder or small intestine. - Stent placement: A surgical procedure in which a stent (a thin, flexible tube or metal tube) is placed in the bile duct to open it and allow bile to flow into the small intestine or through a catheter that goes to a collection bag outside of the body. - Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage: A procedure used to x-ray the liver and bile ducts. A thin needle is inserted through the skin below the ribs and into the liver. Dye is injected into the liver or bile ducts and an x-ray is taken. If the bile duct is blocked, a thin, flexible tube called a stent may be left in the liver to drain bile into the small intestine or a collection bag outside the body. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. External and internal radiation therapy are used to treat bile duct cancer. It is not yet known whether external radiation therapy helps in the treatment of resectable bile duct cancer. In unresectable, metastatic, or recurrent bile duct cancer, new ways to improve the effect of external radiation therapy on cancer cells are being studied: - Hyperthermia therapy: A treatment in which body tissue is exposed to high temperatures to make cancer cells more sensitive to the effects of radiation therapy and certain anticancer drugs. - Radiosensitizers: Drugs that make cancer cells more sensitive to radiation therapy. Combining radiation therapy with radiosensitizers may kill more cancer cells. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Systemic chemotherapy is used to treat unresectable, metastatic, or recurrent bile duct cancer. It is not yet known whether systemic chemotherapy helps in the treatment of resectable bile duct cancer. In unresectable, metastatic, or recurrent bile duct cancer, intra-arterial embolization is being studied. It is a procedure in which the blood supply to a tumor is blocked after anticancer drugs are given in blood vessels near the tumor. Sometimes, the anticancer drugs are attached to small beads that are injected into an artery that feeds the tumor. The beads block blood flow to the tumor as they release the drug. This allows a higher amount of drug to reach the tumor for a longer period of time, which may kill more cancer cells. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Liver transplant In a liver transplant, the entire liver is removed and replaced with a healthy donated liver. A liver transplant may be done in patients with perihilar bile duct cancer. If the patient has to wait for a donated liver, other treatment is given as needed. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Bile Duct Cancer Intrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer Resectable Intrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer Treatment of resectable intrahepatic bile duct cancer may include: - Surgery to remove the cancer, which may include partial hepatectomy. Embolization may be done before surgery. - Surgery followed by chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I intrahepatic bile duct cancer and stage II intrahepatic bile duct cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Unresectable, Recurrent, or Metastatic Intrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer Treatment of unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic intrahepatic bile duct cancer may include the following: - Stent placement as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. - External or internal radiation therapy as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. - Chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of external radiation therapy combined with hyperthermia therapy, radiosensitizer drugs, or chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III intrahepatic bile duct cancer, stage IV intrahepatic bile duct cancer and recurrent intrahepatic bile duct cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Perihilar Bile Duct Cancer Resectable Perihilar Bile Duct Cancer Treatment of resectable perihilar bile duct cancer may include the following: - Surgery to remove the cancer, which may include partial hepatectomy. - Stent placement or percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage as palliative therapy, to relieve jaundice and other symptoms and improve the quality of life. - Surgery followed by radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I perihilar bile duct cancer and stage II perihilar bile duct cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Unresectable, Recurrent, or Metastatic Perihilar Bile Duct Cancer Treatment of unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic perihilar bile duct cancer may include the following: - Stent placement or biliary bypass as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. - External or internal radiation therapy as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. - Chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of external radiation therapy combined with hyperthermia therapy, radiosensitizer drugs, or chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by a liver transplant. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III perihilar bile duct cancer, stage IV perihilar bile duct cancer and recurrent perihilar bile duct cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Distal Extrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer Resectable Distal Extrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer Treatment of resectable distal extrahepatic bile duct cancer may include the following: - Surgery to remove the cancer, which may include a Whipple procedure. - Stent placement or percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage as palliative therapy, to relieve jaundice and other symptoms and improve the quality of life. - Surgery followed by radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with localized extrahepatic bile duct cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Unresectable, Recurrent, or Metastatic Distal Extrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer Treatment of unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic distal extrahepatic bile duct cancer may include the following: - Stent placement or biliary bypass as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. - External or internal radiation therapy as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. - Chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of external radiation therapy combined with hyperthermia therapy, radiosensitizer drugs, or chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with unresectable extrahepatic bile duct cancer, recurrent extrahepatic bile duct cancer and metastatic extrahepatic bile duct cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. 
What Is Prostate Cancer?
Prostate cancer begins when cells in the prostate gland start to grow out of control. The prostate is a gland found only in males. It makes some of the fluid that is part of semen.The prostate is below the bladder (the hollow organ where urine is stored) and in front of the rectum (the last part of the intestines). Just behind the prostate are glands called seminal vesicles, which make most of the fluid for semen. The urethra, which is the tube that carries urine and semen out of the body through the penis, goes through the center of the prostate.Almost all prostate cancers are adenocarcinomas. These cancers develop from the gland cells in the prostate (the cells that make the prostate fluid that is added to the semen).
Which are de condition of prostate cancer?
Some research suggests that prostate cancer might start out as a pre-cancerous condition in some cases. These conditions are sometimes found when a man has a prostate biopsy (removal of small pieces of the prostate to look for cancer).In PIA, the prostate cells look smaller than normal, and there are signs of inflammation in the area. PIA is not cancer, and its not yet clear if PIA might lead to high-grade PIN or prostate cancer.
What are the top 5 warning signs of prostate cancer?
The top 5 early warning signs of prostate cancer may include:
Blood in urine: If your urine is pink or red, you should see a primary care doctor or urologist.Difficulty urinating: Urinary retention is when you have difficulty urinating or completely emptying your bladder. The urethra, or the tube you urinate from, runs through the prostate. As prostate cancer grows, it can cause that tube to collapse and make it so the bladder cannot get urine past it. Sometimes, it requires insertion of a catheter to go inside the bladder to remove the urine.
Pelvic pain: Pain or a sensation in the pelvis can be a sign of advanced prostate cancer. As prostate cancer grows, it can start to invade the muscles in the pelvis or rectal wall. This can give you the sensation that youre sitting on a ball because the prostate may be inflamed. Frequent urination: You may wake up several times during the night to use the bathroom or go more often during the day. Weak urine stream : This can include difficulty starting or maintaining a flow of urine. Other, less common signs include:  Bone pain, Blood in semen, Painful or burning urination, Difficulty holding back urine, Erectile dysfunction,
What is are Hypopharyngeal Cancer ?
  - Hypopharyngeal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the hypopharynx. - Use of tobacco products and heavy drinking can affect the risk of developing hypopharyngeal cancer. - Signs and symptoms of hypopharyngeal cancer include a sore throat and ear pain. - Tests that examine the throat and neck are used to help detect (find) and diagnose hypopharyngeal cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Hypopharyngeal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the hypopharynx. The hypopharynx is the bottom part of the pharynx (throat). The pharynx is a hollow tube about 5 inches long that starts behind the nose, goes down the neck, and ends at the top of the trachea (windpipe) and esophagus (the tube that goes from the throat to the stomach). Air and food pass through the pharynx on the way to the trachea or the esophagus. Most hypopharyngeal cancers form in squamous cells, the thin, flat cells lining the inside of the hypopharynx. The hypopharynx has 3 different areas. Cancer may be found in 1 or more of these areas. Hypopharyngeal cancer is a type of head and neck cancer.
Who is at risk for Hypopharyngeal Cancer? ?
Use of tobacco products and heavy drinking can affect the risk of developing hypopharyngeal cancer. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors include the following: - Smoking tobacco. - Chewing tobacco. - Heavy alcohol use. - Eating a diet without enough nutrients. - Having Plummer-Vinson syndrome.
What are the symptoms of Hypopharyngeal Cancer ?
Signs and symptoms of hypopharyngeal cancer include a sore throat and ear pain. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by hypopharyngeal cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - A sore throat that does not go away. - Ear pain. - A lump in the neck. - Painful or difficult swallowing. - A change in voice.
How to diagnose Hypopharyngeal Cancer ?
Tests that examine the throat and neck are used to help detect (find) and diagnose hypopharyngeal cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam of the throat: An exam in which the doctor feels for swollen lymph nodes in the neck and looks down the throat with a small, long-handled mirror to check for abnormal areas. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. A PET scan and CT scan may be done at the same time. This is called a PET-CT. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in the bones and is detected by a scanner. - Barium esophagogram: An x-ray of the esophagus. The patient drinks a liquid that contains barium (a silver-white metallic compound). The liquid coats the esophagus and x-rays are taken. - Endoscopy : A procedure used to look at areas in the throat that cannot be seen with a mirror during the physical exam of the throat. An endoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted through the nose or mouth to check the throat for anything that seems unusual. Tissue samples may be taken for biopsy. - Esophagoscopy : A procedure to look inside the esophagus to check for abnormal areas. An esophagoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted through the mouth or nose and down the throat into the esophagus. Tissue samples may be taken for biopsy. - Bronchoscopy : A procedure to look inside the trachea and large airways in the lung for abnormal areas. A bronchoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted through the nose or mouth into the trachea and lungs. Tissue samples may be taken for biopsy. - Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope to check for signs of cancer.
What is the outlook for Hypopharyngeal Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Prognosis (chance of recovery) depends on the following: - The stage of the cancer (whether it affects part of the hypopharynx, involves the whole hypopharynx, or has spread to other places in the body). Hypopharyngeal cancer is usually detected in later stages because early signs and symptoms rarely occur. - The patient's age, gender, and general health. - The location of the cancer. - Whether the patient smokes during radiation therapy. Treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer. - Keeping the patient's ability to talk, eat, and breathe as normal as possible. - The patient's general health. Patients who have had hypopharyngeal cancer are at an increased risk of developing a second cancer in the head or neck. Frequent and careful follow-up is important.
What are the stages of Hypopharyngeal Cancer ?
  - After hypopharyngeal cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the hypopharynx or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for hypopharyngeal cancer: - Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV After hypopharyngeal cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the hypopharynx or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the hypopharynx or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage of the disease in order to plan treatment. The results of some of the tests used to diagnose hypopharyngeal cancer are often also used to stage the disease. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if hypopharyngeal cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually hypopharyngeal cancer cells. The disease is metastatic hypopharyngeal cancer, not lung cancer. The following stages are used for hypopharyngeal cancer: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the lining of the hypopharynx. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed in one area of the hypopharynx only and/or the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Stage II In stage II, the tumor is either: - larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters and has not spread to the larynx (voice box); or - found in more than one area of the hypopharynx or in nearby tissues. Stage III In stage III, the tumor: - is larger than 4 centimeters or has spread to the larynx (voice box) or esophagus. Cancer may have spread to one lymph node on the same side of the neck as the tumor and the lymph node is 3 centimeters or smaller; or - has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the neck as the tumor and the lymph node is 3 centimeters or smaller and cancer is found: - in one area of the hypopharynx and/or is 2 centimeters or smaller; or - in more than one area of the hypopharynx or in nearby tissues, or is larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters and has not spread to the larynx. Stage IV Stage IV is divided into stage IVA, IVB, and IVC as follows: - In stage IVA, cancer: - has spread to cartilage around the thyroid or trachea, the bone under the tongue, the thyroid, or nearby soft tissue. Cancer may have spread to one lymph node on the same side of the neck as the tumor and the lymph node is 3 centimeters or smaller; or - has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the neck as the tumor (the lymph node is larger than 3 centimeters but not larger than 6 centimeters) or to lymph nodes anywhere in the neck (affected lymph nodes are 6 centimeters or smaller), and one of the following is true: - cancer is found in one area of the hypopharynx and/or is 2 centimeters or smaller; or - cancer is found in more than one area of the hypopharynx or in nearby tissues, or is larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 4 centimeters and has not spread to the larynx (voice box); or - cancer has spread to the larynx or esophagus and is more than 4 centimeters; or - cancer has spread to cartilage around the thyroid or trachea, the bone under the tongue, the thyroid, or nearby soft tissue. - In stage IVB, the tumor: - has spread to muscles around the upper part of the spinal column, the carotid artery, or the lining of the chest cavity and may have spread to lymph nodes which can be any size; or - may be any size and has spread to one or more lymph nodes that are larger than 6 centimeters. - In stage IVC, the tumor may be any size and has spread beyond the hypopharynx to other parts of the body.
What are the treatments for Hypopharyngeal Cancer ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with hypopharyngeal cancer. - Three types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with hypopharyngeal cancer. Different types of treatment are available for patients with hypopharyngeal cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Three types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery (removing the cancer in an operation) is a common treatment for all stages of hypopharyngeal cancer. The following surgical procedures may be used: - Laryngopharyngectomy: Surgery to remove the larynx (voice box) and part of the pharynx (throat). - Partial laryngopharyngectomy: Surgery to remove part of the larynx and part of the pharynx. A partial laryngopharyngectomy prevents loss of the voice. - Neck dissection: Surgery to remove lymph nodes and other tissues in the neck. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat hypopharyngeal cancer. Radiation therapy may work better in patients who have stopped smoking before beginning treatment. External radiation therapy to the thyroid or the pituitary gland may change the way the thyroid gland works. A blood test to check the thyroid hormone level in the body may be done before and after therapy to make sure the thyroid gland is working properly. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Chemotherapy may be used to shrink the tumor before surgery or radiation therapy. This is called neoadjuvant chemotherapy. See Drugs Approved for Head and Neck Cancer for more information. (Hypopharyngeal cancer is a type of head and neck cancer.) New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. For hypopharyngeal cancer, follow-up to check for recurrence should include careful head and neck exams once a month in the first year after treatment ends, every 2 months in the second year, every 3 months in the third year, and every 6 months thereafter. Treatment Options by Stage Stage I Hypopharyngeal Cancer Treatment of stage I hypopharyngeal cancer may include the following: - Laryngopharyngectomy and neck dissection with or without high-dose radiation therapy to the lymph nodes of the neck. - Partial laryngopharyngectomy with or without high-dose radiation therapy to the lymph nodes on both sides of the neck. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I hypopharyngeal cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage II Hypopharyngeal Cancer Treatment of stage II hypopharyngeal cancer may include the following: - Laryngopharyngectomy and neck dissection. High-dose radiation therapy to the lymph nodes of the neck may be given before or after surgery. - Partial laryngopharyngectomy. High-dose radiation therapy to the lymph nodes of the neck may be given before or after surgery. - Chemotherapy given during or after radiation therapy or after surgery. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy or surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II hypopharyngeal cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Hypopharyngeal Cancer Treatment of stage III hypopharyngeal cancer may include the following: - Radiation therapy before or after surgery. - Chemotherapy given during or after radiation therapy or after surgery. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy followed by surgery and/or radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of surgery followed by chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation therapy. Treatment and follow-up of stage III hypopharyngeal cancer is complex and is ideally overseen by a team of specialists with experience and expertise in treating this type of cancer. If all or part of the hypopharynx is removed, the patient may need plastic surgery and other special help with breathing, eating, and talking. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III hypopharyngeal cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage IV Hypopharyngeal Cancer Treatment of stage IV hypopharyngeal cancer that can be treated with surgery may include the following: - Radiation therapy before or after surgery. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy followed by surgery and/or radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of surgery followed by chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation therapy. Surgical treatment and follow-up of stage IV hypopharyngeal cancer is complex and is ideally overseen by a team of specialists with experience and expertise in treating this type of cancer. If all or part of the hypopharynx is removed, the patient may need plastic surgery and other special help with breathing, eating, and talking. Treatment of stage IV hypopharyngeal cancer that cannot be treated with surgery may include the following: - Radiation therapy. - Chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of radiation therapy with chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV hypopharyngeal cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Hypopharyngeal Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical
What is are Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) ?
  - Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors form in hormone-making cells (islet cells) of the pancreas. - Pancreatic NETs may or may not cause signs or symptoms. - There are different kinds of functional pancreatic NETs. - Having certain syndromes can increase the risk of pancreatic NETs. - Different types of pancreatic NETs have different signs and symptoms. - Lab tests and imaging tests are used to detect (find) and diagnose pancreatic NETs. - Other kinds of lab tests are used to check for the specific type of pancreatic NETs. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors form in hormone-making cells (islet cells) of the pancreas. The pancreas is a gland about 6 inches long that is shaped like a thin pear lying on its side. The wider end of the pancreas is called the head, the middle section is called the body, and the narrow end is called the tail. The pancreas lies behind the stomach and in front of the spine. There are two kinds of cells in the pancreas: - Endocrine pancreas cells make several kinds of hormones (chemicals that control the actions of certain cells or organs in the body), such as insulin to control blood sugar. They cluster together in many small groups (islets) throughout the pancreas. Endocrine pancreas cells are also called islet cells or islets of Langerhans. Tumors that form in islet cells are called islet cell tumors, pancreatic endocrine tumors, or pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pancreatic NETs). - Exocrine pancreas cells make enzymes that are released into the small intestine to help the body digest food. Most of the pancreas is made of ducts with small sacs at the end of the ducts, which are lined with exocrine cells. This summary discusses islet cell tumors of the endocrine pancreas. See the PDQ summary on Pancreatic Cancer Treatment for information on exocrine pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) may be benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer). When pancreatic NETs are malignant, they are called pancreatic endocrine cancer or islet cell carcinoma. Pancreatic NETs are much less common than pancreatic exocrine tumors and have a better prognosis. There are different kinds of functional pancreatic NETs. Pancreatic NETs make different kinds of hormones such as gastrin, insulin, and glucagon. Functional pancreatic NETs include the following: - Gastrinoma: A tumor that forms in cells that make gastrin. Gastrin is a hormone that causes the stomach to release an acid that helps digest food. Both gastrin and stomach acid are increased by gastrinomas. When increased stomach acid, stomach ulcers, and diarrhea are caused by a tumor that makes gastrin, it is called Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. A gastrinoma usually forms in the head of the pancreas and sometimes forms in the small intestine. Most gastrinomas are malignant (cancer). - Insulinoma: A tumor that forms in cells that make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that controls the amount of glucose (sugar) in the blood. It moves glucose into the cells, where it can be used by the body for energy. Insulinomas are usually slow-growing tumors that rarely spread. An insulinoma forms in the head, body, or tail of the pancreas. Insulinomas are usually benign (not cancer). - Glucagonoma: A tumor that forms in cells that make glucagon. Glucagon is a hormone that increases the amount of glucose in the blood. It causes the liver to break down glycogen. Too much glucagon causes hyperglycemia (high blood sugar). A glucagonoma usually forms in the tail of the pancreas. Most glucagonomas are malignant (cancer). - Other types of tumors: There are other rare types of functional pancreatic NETs that make hormones, including hormones that control the balance of sugar, salt, and water in the body. These tumors include: - VIPomas, which make vasoactive intestinal peptide. VIPoma may also be called Verner-Morrison syndrome. - Somatostatinomas, which make somatostatin. These other types of tumors are grouped together because they are treated in much the same way.
Who is at risk for Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors)? ?
Having certain syndromes can increase the risk of pancreatic NETs. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) syndrome is a risk factor for pancreatic NETs.
How to diagnose Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) ?
Lab tests and imaging tests are used to detect (find) and diagnose pancreatic NETs. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances, such as glucose (sugar), released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - Chromogranin A test: A test in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amount of chromogranin A in the blood. A higher than normal amount of chromogranin A and normal amounts of hormones such as gastrin, insulin, and glucagon can be a sign of a non-functional pancreatic NET. - Abdominal CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of the abdomen, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy : A type of radionuclide scan that may be used to find small pancreatic NETs. A small amount of radioactive octreotide (a hormone that attaches to tumors) is injected into a vein and travels through the blood. The radioactive octreotide attaches to the tumor and a special camera that detects radioactivity is used to show where the tumors are in the body. This procedure is also called octreotide scan and SRS. - Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS): A procedure in which an endoscope is inserted into the body, usually through the mouth or rectum. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. A probe at the end of the endoscope is used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. This procedure is also called endosonography. - Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP): A procedure used to x-ray the ducts (tubes) that carry bile from the liver to the gallbladder and from the gallbladder to the small intestine. Sometimes pancreatic cancer causes these ducts to narrow and block or slow the flow of bile, causing jaundice. An endoscope is passed through the mouth, esophagus, and stomach into the first part of the small intestine. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. A catheter (a smaller tube) is then inserted through the endoscope into the pancreatic ducts. A dye is injected through the catheter into the ducts and an x-ray is taken. If the ducts are blocked by a tumor, a fine tube may be inserted into the duct to unblock it. This tube (or stent) may be left in place to keep the duct open. Tissue samples may also be taken and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. - Angiogram : A procedure to look at blood vessels and the flow of blood. A contrast dye is injected into the blood vessel. As the contrast dye moves through the blood vessel, x-rays are taken to see if there are any blockages. - Laparotomy : A surgical procedure in which an incision (cut) is made in the wall of the abdomen to check the inside of the abdomen for signs of disease. The size of the incision depends on the reason the laparotomy is being done. Sometimes organs are removed or tissue samples are taken and checked under a microscope for signs of disease. - Intraoperative ultrasound : A procedure that uses high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) to create images of internal organs or tissues during surgery. A transducer placed directly on the organ or tissue is used to make the sound waves, which create echoes. The transducer receives the echoes and sends them to a computer, which uses the echoes to make pictures called sonograms. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. There are several ways to do a biopsy for pancreatic NETs. Cells may be removed using a fine or wide needle inserted into the pancreas during an x-ray or ultrasound. Tissue may also be removed during a laparoscopy (a surgical incision made in the wall of the abdomen). - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the blood. The radioactive material collects in bones where cancer cells have spread and is detected by a scanner. Other kinds of lab tests are used to check for the specific type of pancreatic NETs. The following tests and procedures may be used: Gastrinoma - Fasting serum gastrin test: A test in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amount of gastrin in the blood. This test is done after the patient has had nothing to eat or drink for at least 8 hours. Conditions other than gastrinoma can cause an increase in the amount of gastrin in the blood. - Basal acid output test: A test to measure the amount of acid made by the stomach. The test is done after the patient has had nothing to eat or drink for at least 8 hours. A tube is inserted through the nose or throat, into the stomach. The stomach contents are removed and four samples of gastric acid are removed through the tube. These samples are used to find out the amount of gastric acid made during the test and the pH level of the gastric secretions. - Secretin stimulation test : If the basal acid output test result is not normal, a secretin stimulation test may be done. The tube is moved into the small intestine and samples are taken from the small intestine after a drug called secretin is injected. Secretin causes the small intestine to make acid. When there is a gastrinoma, the secretin causes an increase in how much gastric acid is made and the level of gastrin in the blood. - Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: A type of radionuclide scan that may be used to find small pancreatic NETs. A small amount of radioactive octreotide (a hormone that attaches to tumors) is injected into a vein and travels through the blood. The radioactive octreotide attaches to the tumor and a special camera that detects radioactivity is used to show where the tumors are in the body. This procedure is also called octreotide scan and SRS. Insulinoma - Fasting serum glucose and insulin test: A test in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of glucose (sugar) and insulin in the blood. The test is done after the patient has had nothing to eat or drink for at least 24 hours. Glucagonoma - Fasting serum glucagon test: A test in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amount of glucagon in the blood. The test is done after the patient has had nothing to eat or drink for at least 8 hours. Other tumor types - VIPoma - Serum VIP (vasoactive intestinal peptide) test: A test in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amount of VIP. - Blood chemistry studies: A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. In VIPoma, there is a lower than normal amount of potassium. - Stool analysis : A stool sample is checked for a higher than normal sodium (salt) and potassium levels. - Somatostatinoma - Fasting serum somatostatin test: A test in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amount of somatostatin in the blood. The test is done after the patient has had nothing to eat or drink for at least 8 hours. - Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: A type of radionuclide scan that may be used to find small pancreatic NETs. A small amount of radioactive octreotide (a hormone that attaches to tumors) is injected into a vein and travels through the blood. The radioactive octreotide attaches to the tumor and a special camera that detects radioactivity is used to show where the tumors are in the body. This procedure is also called octreotide scan and SRS.
What is the outlook for Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Pancreatic NETs can often be cured. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The type of cancer cell. - Where the tumor is found in the pancreas. - Whether the tumor has spread to more than one place in the pancreas or to other parts of the body. - Whether the patient has MEN1 syndrome. - The patient's age and general health. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) ?
  - The plan for cancer treatment depends on where the NET is found in the pancreas and whether it has spread. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. The plan for cancer treatment depends on where the NET is found in the pancreas and whether it has spread. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the pancreas or to other parts of the body is called staging. The results of the tests and procedures used to diagnose pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are also used to find out whether the cancer has spread. See the General Information section for a description of these tests and procedures. Although there is a standard staging system for pancreatic NETs, it is not used to plan treatment. Treatment of pancreatic NETs is based on the following: - Whether the cancer is found in one place in the pancreas. - Whether the cancer is found in several places in the pancreas. - Whether the cancer has spread to lymph nodes near the pancreas or to other parts of the body such as the liver, lung, peritoneum, or bone. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of tumor as the primary tumor. For example, if a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor spreads to the liver, the tumor cells in the liver are actually neuroendocrine tumor cells. The disease is metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, not liver cancer.
What are the treatments for Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with pancreatic NETs. - Six types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Chemotherapy - Hormone therapy - Hepatic arterial occlusion or chemoembolization - Targeted therapy - Supportive care - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with pancreatic NETs. Different types of treatments are available for patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Six types of standard treatment are used: Surgery An operation may be done to remove the tumor. One of the following types of surgery may be used: - Enucleation: Surgery to remove the tumor only. This may be done when cancer occurs in one place in the pancreas. - Pancreatoduodenectomy: A surgical procedure in which the head of the pancreas, the gallbladder, nearby lymph nodes and part of the stomach, small intestine, and bile duct are removed. Enough of the pancreas is left to make digestive juices and insulin. The organs removed during this procedure depend on the patient's condition. This is also called the Whipple procedure. - Distal pancreatectomy: Surgery to remove the body and tail of the pancreas. The spleen may also be removed. - Total gastrectomy: Surgery to remove the whole stomach. - Parietal cell vagotomy: Surgery to cut the nerve that causes stomach cells to make acid. - Liver resection: Surgery to remove part or all of the liver. - Radiofrequency ablation: The use of a special probe with tiny electrodes that kill cancer cells. Sometimes the probe is inserted directly through the skin and only local anesthesia is needed. In other cases, the probe is inserted through an incision in the abdomen. This is done in the hospital with general anesthesia. - Cryosurgical ablation: A procedure in which tissue is frozen to destroy abnormal cells. This is usually done with a special instrument that contains liquid nitrogen or liquid carbon dioxide. The instrument may be used during surgery or laparoscopy or inserted through the skin. This procedure is also called cryoablation. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Combination chemotherapy is the use of more than one anticancer drug. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type of the cancer being treated. Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a cancer treatment that removes hormones or blocks their action and stops cancer cells from growing. Hormones are substances made by glands in the body and circulated in the bloodstream. Some hormones can cause certain cancers to grow. If tests show that the cancer cells have places where hormones can attach (receptors), drugs, surgery, or radiation therapy is used to reduce the production of hormones or block them from working. Hepatic arterial occlusion or chemoembolization Hepatic arterial occlusion uses drugs, small particles, or other agents to block or reduce the flow of blood to the liver through the hepatic artery (the major blood vessel that carries blood to the liver). This is done to kill cancer cells growing in the liver. The tumor is prevented from getting the oxygen and nutrients it needs to grow. The liver continues to receive blood from the hepatic portal vein, which carries blood from the stomach and intestine. Chemotherapy delivered during hepatic arterial occlusion is called chemoembolization. The anticancer drug is injected into the hepatic artery through a catheter (thin tube). The drug is mixed with the substance that blocks the artery and cuts off blood flow to the tumor. Most of the anticancer drug is trapped near the tumor and only a small amount of the drug reaches other parts of the body. The blockage may be temporary or permanent, depending on the substance used to block the artery. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Certain types of targeted therapies are being studied in the treatment of pancreatic NETs. Supportive care Supportive care is given to lessen the problems caused by the disease or its treatment. Supportive care for pancreatic NETs may include treatment for the following: - Stomach ulcers may be treated with drug therapy such as: - Proton pump inhibitor drugs such as omeprazole, lansoprazole, or pantoprazole. - Histamine blocking drugs such as cimetidine, ranitidine, or famotidine. - Somatostatin-type drugs such as octreotide. - Diarrhea may be treated with: - Intravenous (IV) fluids with electrolytes such as potassium or chloride. - Somatostatin-type drugs such as octreotide. - Low blood sugar may be treated by having small, frequent meals or with drug therapy to maintain a normal blood sugar level. - High blood sugar may be treated with drugs taken by mouth or insulin by injection. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors Gastrinoma Treatment of gastrinoma may include supportive care and the following: - For symptoms caused by too much stomach acid, treatment may be a drug that decreases the amount of acid made by the stomach. - For a single tumor in the head of the pancreas: - Surgery to remove the tumor. - Surgery to cut the nerve that causes stomach cells to make acid and treatment with a drug that decreases stomach acid. - Surgery to remove the whole stomach (rare). - For a single tumor in the body or tail of the pancreas, treatment is usually surgery to remove the body or tail of the pancreas. - For several tumors in the pancreas, treatment is usually surgery to remove the body or tail of the pancreas. If tumor remains after surgery, treatment may include either: - Surgery to cut the nerve that causes stomach cells to make acid and treatment with a drug that decreases stomach acid; or - Surgery to remove the whole stomach (rare). - For one or more tumors in the duodenum (the part of the small intestine that connects to the stomach), treatment is usually pancreatoduodenectomy (surgery to remove the head of the pancreas, the gallbladder, nearby lymph nodes and part of the stomach, small intestine, and bile duct). - If no tumor is found, treatment may include the following: - Surgery to cut the nerve that causes stomach cells to make acid and treatment with a drug that decreases stomach acid. - Surgery to remove the whole stomach (rare). - If the cancer has spread to the liver, treatment may include: - Surgery to remove part or all of the liver. - Radiofrequency ablation or cryosurgical ablation. - Chemoembolization. - If cancer has spread to other parts of the body or does not get better with surgery or drugs to decrease stomach acid, treatment may include: - Chemotherapy. - Hormone therapy. - If the cancer mostly affects the liver and the patient has severe symptoms from hormones or from the size of tumor, treatment may include: - Hepatic arterial occlusion, with or without systemic chemotherapy. - Chemoembolization, with or without systemic chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with gastrinoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Insulinoma Treatment of insulinoma may include the following: - For one small tumor in the head or tail of the pancreas, treatment is usually surgery to remove the tumor. - For one large tumor in the head of the pancreas that cannot be removed by surgery, treatment is usually pancreatoduodenectomy (surgery to remove the head of the pancreas, the gallbladder, nearby lymph nodes and part of the stomach, small intestine, and bile duct). - For one large tumor in the body or tail of the pancreas, treatment is usually a distal pancreatectomy (surgery to remove the body and tail of the pancreas). - For more than one tumor in the pancreas, treatment is usually surgery to remove any tumors in the head of the pancreas and the body and tail of the pancreas. - For tumors that cannot be removed by surgery, treatment may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy. - Palliative drug therapy to decrease the amount of insulin made by the pancreas. - Hormone therapy. - Radiofrequency ablation or cryosurgical ablation. - For cancer that has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body, treatment may include the following: - Surgery to remove the cancer. - Radiofrequency ablation or cryosurgical ablation, if the cancer cannot be removed by surgery. - If the cancer mostly affects the liver and the patient has severe symptoms from hormones or from the size of tumor, treatment may include: - Hepatic arterial occlusion, with or without systemic chemotherapy. - Chemoembolization, with or without systemic chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with insulinoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Glucagonoma Treatment may include the following: - For one small tumor in the head or tail of the pancreas, treatment is usually surgery to remove the tumor. - For one large tumor in the head of the pancreas that cannot be removed by surgery, treatment is usually pancreatoduodenectomy (surgery to remove the head of the pancreas, the gallbladder, nearby lymph nodes and part of the stomach, small intestine, and bile duct). - For more than one tumor in the pancreas, treatment is usually surgery to remove the tumor or surgery to remove the body and tail of the pancreas. - For tumors that cannot be removed by surgery, treatment may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy. - Hormone therapy. - Radiofrequency ablation or cryosurgical ablation. - For cancer that has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body, treatment may include the following: - Surgery to remove the cancer. - Radiofrequency ablation or cryosurgical ablation, if the cancer cannot be removed by surgery. - If the cancer mostly affects the liver and the patient has severe symptoms from hormones or from the size of tumor, treatment may include: - Hepatic arterial occlusion, with or without systemic chemotherapy. - Chemoembolization, with or without systemic chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with glucagonoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Other Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) For VIPoma, treatment may include the following: - Fluids and hormone therapy to replace fluids and electrolytes that have been lost from the body. - Surgery to remove the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. - Surgery to remove as much of the tumor as possible when the tumor cannot be completely removed or has spread to distant parts of the body. This is palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. - For tumors that have spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body, treatment may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor. - Radiofrequency ablation or cryosurgical ablation, if the tumor cannot be removed by surgery. - For tumors that continue to grow during treatment or have spread to other parts of the body, treatment may include the following: - Chemotherapy. - Targeted therapy. For somatostatinoma, treatment may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor. - For cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body, surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. - For tumors that continue to grow during treatment or have spread to other parts of the body, treatment may include the following: - Chemotherapy. - Targeted therapy. Treatment of other types of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor. - For cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body, surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible or hormone therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. - For tumors that continue to grow during treatment or have spread to other parts of the body, treatment may include the following: - Chemotherapy. - Targeted therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with islet cell tumor. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Recurrent or Progressive Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) Treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) that continue to grow during treatment or recur (come back) may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor. - Chemotherapy. - Hormone therapy. - Targeted therapy. - For liver metastases: - Regional chemotherapy. - Hepatic arterial occlusion or chemoembolization, with or without systemic chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of a new therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent islet cell carcinoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (Islet Cell Tumors) ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter ?
  - Transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the renal pelvis and ureter. - Misuse of certain pain medicines can affect the risk of transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. - Signs and symptoms of transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter include blood in the urine and back pain. - Tests that examine the abdomen and kidneys are used to detect (find) and diagnose transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the renal pelvis and ureter. The renal pelvis is the top part of the ureter. The ureter is a long tube that connects the kidney to the bladder. There are two kidneys, one on each side of the backbone, above the waist. The kidneys of an adult are about 5 inches long and 3 inches wide and are shaped like a kidney bean. Tiny tubules in the kidneys filter and clean the blood. They take out waste products and make urine. The urine collects in the middle of each kidney in the renal pelvis. Urine passes from the renal pelvis through the ureter into the bladder. The bladder holds the urine until it passes through the urethra and leaves the body. The renal pelvis and ureters are lined with transitional cells. These cells can change shape and stretch without breaking apart. Transitional cell cancer starts in these cells. Transitional cell cancer can form in the renal pelvis or the ureter or both. Renal cell cancer is a more common type of kidney cancer. See the PDQ summary about Renal Cell Cancer Treatment for more information.
What are the symptoms of Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter ?
Signs and symptoms of transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter include blood in the urine and back pain. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter or by other conditions. There may be no signs or symptoms in the early stages. Signs and symptoms may appear as the tumor grows. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Blood in the urine. - A pain in the back that doesn't go away. - Extreme tiredness. - Weight loss with no known reason. - Painful or frequent urination.
How to diagnose Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter ?
Tests that examine the abdomen and kidneys are used to detect (find) and diagnose transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Urinalysis : A test to check the color of urine and its contents, such as sugar, protein, blood, and bacteria. - Ureteroscopy : A procedure to look inside the ureter and renal pelvis to check for abnormal areas. A ureteroscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. The ureteroscope is inserted through the urethra into the bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis. A tool may be inserted through the ureteroscope to take tissue samples to be checked under a microscope for signs of disease. - Urine cytology : A laboratory test in which a sample of urine is checked under a microscope for abnormal cells. Cancer in the kidney, bladder, or ureter may shed cancer cells into the urine. - Intravenous pyelogram (IVP): A series of x-rays of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder to check for cancer. A contrast dye is injected into a vein. As the contrast dye moves through the kidneys, ureters, and bladder, x-rays are taken to see if there are any blockages. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Ultrasound : A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. An ultrasound of the abdomen may be done to help diagnose cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the pelvis. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. This may be done during a ureteroscopy or surgery.
What is the outlook for Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) depends on the stage and grade of the tumor. The treatment options depend on the following: - The stage and grade of the tumor. - Where the tumor is. - Whether the patient's other kidney is healthy. - Whether the cancer has recurred. Most transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter can be cured if found early.
What are the stages of Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter ?
  - After transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the renal pelvis and ureter or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and/or ureter: - Stage 0 (Papillary Carcinoma and Carcinoma in Situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV - Transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is also described as localized, regional, or metastatic: - Localized - Regional - Metastatic After transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the renal pelvis and ureter or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the renal pelvis and ureter or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Ureteroscopy : A procedure to look inside the ureter and renal pelvis to check for abnormal areas. A ureteroscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. The ureteroscope is inserted through the urethra into the bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis. A tool may be inserted through the ureteroscope to take tissue samples to be checked under a microscope for signs of disease. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if transitional cell cancer of the ureter spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually ureter cancer cells. The disease is metastatic cancer of the ureter, not lung cancer. The following stages are used for transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and/or ureter: Stage 0 (Papillary Carcinoma and Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in tissue lining the inside of the renal pelvis or ureter. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is divided into stage 0a and stage 0is, depending on the type of tumor: - Stage 0a may look like tiny mushrooms growing from the tissue lining the inside of the renal pelvis or ureter. Stage 0a is also called noninvasive papillary carcinoma. - Stage 0is is a flat tumor on the tissue lining the inside of the renal pelvis or ureter. Stage 0is is also called carcinoma in situ. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed and spread through the lining of the renal pelvis and/or ureter, into the layer of connective tissue. Stage II In stage II, cancer has spread through the layer of connective tissue to the muscle layer of the renal pelvis and/or ureter. Stage III In stage III, cancer has spread: - From the renal pelvis to tissue or fat in the kidney; or - From the ureter to fat that surrounds the ureter. Stage IV In stage IV, cancer has spread to at least one of the following: - A nearby organ. - The layer of fat surrounding the kidney. - One or more lymph nodes. - Distant parts of the body, such as the lung, liver, or bone. Transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is also described as localized, regional, or metastatic: Localized The cancer is found only in the kidney. Regional The cancer has spread to tissues around the kidney and to nearby lymph nodes and blood vessels in the pelvis. Metastatic The cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
What are the treatments for Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. - One type of standard treatment is used: - Surgery - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Fulguration - Segmental resection of the renal pelvis - Laser surgery - Regional chemotherapy and regional biologic therapy - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. Different types of treatments are available for patients with transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. One type of standard treatment is used: Surgery One of the following surgical procedures may be used to treat transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter: - Nephroureterectomy: Surgery to remove the entire kidney, the ureter, and the bladder cuff (tissue that connects the ureter to the bladder). - Segmental resection of the ureter: A surgical procedure to remove the part of the ureter that contains cancer and some of the healthy tissue around it. The ends of the ureter are then reattached. This treatment is used when the cancer is superficial and in the lower third of the ureter only, near the bladder. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI Web site. Fulguration Fulguration is a surgical procedure that destroys tissue using an electric current. A tool with a small wire loop on the end is used to remove the cancer or to burn away the tumor with electricity. Segmental resection of the renal pelvis This is a surgical procedure to remove localized cancer from the renal pelvis without removing the entire kidney. Segmental resection may be done to save kidney function when the other kidney is damaged or has already been removed. Laser surgery A laser beam (narrow beam of intense light) is used as a knife to remove the cancer. A laser beam can also be used to kill the cancer cells. This procedure may also be called or laser fulguration. Regional chemotherapy and regional biologic therapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer; substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. Regional treatment means the anticancer drugs or biologic substances are placed directly into an organ or a body cavity such as the abdomen, so the drugs will affect cancer cells in that area. Clinical trials are studying chemotherapy or biologic therapy using drugs placed directly into the renal pelvis or the ureter. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter Localized Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter Treatment of localized transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter may include the following: - Surgery (nephroureterectomy or segmental resection of ureter). - A clinical trial of fulguration. - A clinical trial of laser surgery. - A clinical trial of segmental resection of the renal pelvis. - A clinical trial of regional chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of regional biologic therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with localized transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Regional Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter Treatment of regional transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is usually done in a clinical trial. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with regional transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Metastatic Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter Treatment of metastatic transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is usually done in a clinical trial, which may include chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with metastatic transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Recurrent Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter Treatment of recurrent transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter is usually done in a clinical trial, which may include chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent transitional cell cancer of the renal pelvis and ureter. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Transitional Cell Cancer of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI Web site. Fulguration Fulguration is a surgical procedure that destroys tissue using an electric current. A tool with a small wire loop on the end is used to remove the cancer or to burn away the tumor with electricity. Segmental resection of the renal pelvis This is a surgical procedure to remove localized cancer from the renal pelvis without removing the entire kidney. Segmental resection may be done to save kidney function when the other kidney is damaged or has already been removed. Laser surgery A laser beam (narrow beam of intense light) is used as a knife to remove the cancer. A laser beam can also be used to kill the cancer cells. This procedure may also be called or laser fulguration. Regional chemotherapy and regional biologic therapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer; substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. Regional treatment means the anticancer drugs or biologic substances are placed directly into an organ or a body cavity such as the abdomen, so the drugs will affect cancer cells in that area. Clinical trials are studying chemotherapy or biologic therapy using drugs placed directly into the renal pelvis or the ureter. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors ?
  - Childhood kidney tumors are diseases in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the kidney. - There are many types of childhood kidney tumors. - Wilms Tumor - Renal Cell Cancer (RCC) - Rhabdoid Tumor of the Kidney - Clear Cell Sarcoma of the Kidney - Congenital Mesoblastic Nephroma - Ewing Sarcoma of the Kidney - Primary Renal Myoepithelial Carcinoma - Cystic Partially Differentiated Nephroblastoma - Multilocular Cystic Nephroma - Primary Renal Synovial Sarcoma - Anaplastic Sarcoma of the Kidney - Nephroblastomatosis is not cancer but may become Wilms tumor. - Having certain genetic syndromes or other conditions can increase the risk of Wilms tumor. - Tests are used to screen for Wilms tumor. - Having certain conditions may increase the risk of renal cell cancer. - Treatment for Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors may include genetic counseling. - Signs of Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors include a lump in the abdomen and blood in the urine. - Tests that examine the kidney and the blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Childhood kidney tumors are diseases in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the kidney. There are two kidneys, one on each side of the backbone, above the waist. Tiny tubules in the kidneys filter and clean the blood. They take out waste products and make urine. The urine passes from each kidney through a long tube called a ureter into the bladder. The bladder holds the urine until it passes through the urethra and leaves the body. There are many types of childhood kidney tumors. Wilms Tumor In Wilms tumor, one or more tumors may be found in one or both kidneys. Wilms tumor may spread to the lungs, liver, bone, brain, or nearby lymph nodes. In children and adolescents younger than 15 years old, most kidney cancers are Wilms tumors. Renal Cell Cancer (RCC) Renal cell cancer is rare in children and adolescents younger than 15 years old. It is much more common in adolescents between 15 and 19 years old. Children and adolescents are more likely to be diagnosed with a large renal cell tumor or cancer that has spread. Renal cell cancers may spread to the lungs, liver, or lymph nodes. Renal cell cancer may also be called renal cell carcinoma. Rhabdoid Tumor of the Kidney Rhabdoid tumor of the kidney is a type of kidney cancer that occurs mostly in infants and young children. It is often advanced at the time of diagnosis. Rhabdoid tumor of the kidney grows and spreads quickly, often to the lungs or brain. Children with a certain change in the SMARCB1 gene are checked regularly to see if a rhabdoid tumor has formed in the kidney or has spread to the brain: - Children younger than one year old have an ultrasound of the abdomen every two to three months and an ultrasound of the head every month. - Children one to four years old have an ultrasound of the abdomen and an MRI of the brain and spine every three months. Clear Cell Sarcoma of the Kidney Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney is a type of kidney tumor that may spread to the lung, bone, brain, or soft tissue. When it recurs (comes back) after treatment, it often recurs in the brain or lung. Congenital Mesoblastic Nephroma Congenital mesoblastic nephroma is a tumor of the kidney that is often diagnosed during the first year of life. It can usually be cured. Ewing Sarcoma of the Kidney Ewing sarcoma (previously called neuroepithelial tumor) of the kidney is rare and usually occurs in young adults. These tumors grow and spread to other parts of the body quickly. Primary Renal Myoepithelial Carcinoma Primary renal myoepithelial carcinoma is a rare type of cancer that usually affects soft tissues, but sometimes forms in the internal organs (such as the kidney). This type of cancer grows and spreads quickly. Cystic Partially Differentiated Nephroblastoma Cystic partially differentiated nephroblastoma is a very rare type of Wilms tumor made up of cysts. Multilocular Cystic Nephroma Multilocular cystic nephromas are benign tumors made up of cysts and are most common in infants, young children, and adult women. These tumors can occur in one or both kidneys. Children with this type of tumor also may have pleuropulmonary blastoma, so imaging tests that check the lungs for cysts or solid tumors are done. Since multilocular cystic nephroma may be an inherited condition, genetic counseling and genetic testing may be considered. See the PDQ summary about Unusual Cancers of Childhood Treatment for more information about pleuropulmonary blastoma. Primary Renal Synovial Sarcoma Primary renal synovial sarcoma is a cyst-like tumor of the kidney and is most common in young adults. These tumors grow and spread quickly. Anaplastic Sarcoma of the Kidney Anaplastic sarcoma of the kidney is a rare tumor that is most common in children or adolescents younger than 15 years of age. Anaplastic sarcoma of the kidney often spreads to the lungs, liver, or bones. Imaging tests that check the lungs for cysts or solid tumors may be done. Since anaplastic sarcoma may be an inherited condition, genetic counseling and genetic testing may be considered. Nephroblastomatosis is not cancer but may become Wilms tumor. Sometimes, after the kidneys form in the fetus, abnormal groups of kidney cells remain in one or both kidneys. In nephroblastomatosis (diffuse hyperplastic perilobar nephroblastomatosis), these abnormal groups of cells may grow in many places inside the kidney or make a thick layer around the kidney. When these groups of abnormal cells are found in a kidney after it was removed for Wilms tumor, the child has an increased risk of Wilms tumor in the other kidney. Frequent follow-up testing is important at least every 3 months, for at least 7 years after the child is treated. Treatment for Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors may include genetic counseling. Genetic counseling (a discussion with a trained professional about genetic diseases and whether genetic testing is needed) may be needed if the child has one of the following syndromes or conditions: - A genetic syndrome or condition that increases the risk of Wilms tumor. - An inherited condition that increases the risk of renal cell cancer. - Rhabdoid tumor of the kidney. - Multilocular cystic nephroma.
Who is at risk for Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors? ?
Having certain genetic syndromes or other conditions can increase the risk of Wilms tumor. Anything that increases the risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk to your child's doctor if you think your child may be at risk. Wilms tumor may be part of a genetic syndrome that affects growth or development. A genetic syndrome is a set of signs and symptoms or conditions that occur together and is caused by certain changes in the genes. Certain conditions can also increase a child's risk of developing Wilms tumor. These and other genetic syndromes and conditions have been linked to Wilms tumor: - WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, abnormal genitourinary system, and mental retardation). - Denys-Drash syndrome (abnormal genitourinary system). - Frasier syndrome (abnormal genitourinary system). - Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (abnormally large growth of one side of the body or a body part, large tongue, umbilical hernia at birth, and abnormal genitourinary system). - A family history of Wilms tumor. - Aniridia (the iris, the colored part of the eye, is missing). - Isolated hemihyperplasia (abnormally large growth of one side of the body or a body part). - Urinary tract problems such as cryptorchidism or hypospadias. Having certain conditions may increase the risk of renal cell cancer. Renal cell cancer may be related to the following conditions: - Von Hippel-Lindau disease (an inherited condition that causes abnormal growth of blood vessels). Children with Von Hippel-Lindau disease should be checked yearly for renal cell cancer with an ultrasound of the abdomen or an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) beginning at age 8 to 11 years. - Tuberous sclerosis (an inherited disease marked by noncancerous fatty cysts in the kidney). - Familial renal cell cancer (an inherited condition that occurs when certain changes in the genes that cause kidney cancer are passed down from the parent to the child). - Renal medullary cancer (a rare kidney cancer that grows and spreads quickly). - Hereditary leiomyomatosis (an inherited disorder that increases the risk of having cancer of the kidney, skin, and uterus). Prior chemotherapy or radiation therapy for a childhood cancer, such as neuroblastoma, soft tissue sarcoma, leukemia, or Wilms tumor may also increase the risk of renal cell cancer. See the Second Cancers section in the PDQ summary about Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information.
What are the symptoms of Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors ?
Signs of Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors include a lump in the abdomen and blood in the urine. Sometimes childhood kidney tumors do not cause signs and symptoms and the parent finds a mass in the abdomen by chance or the mass is found during a well-child health check up. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by kidney tumors or by other conditions. Check with your child's doctor if your child has any of the following: - A lump, swelling, or pain in the abdomen. - Blood in the urine. - High blood pressure (headache, feeling very tired, chest pain, or trouble seeing or breathing). - Hypercalcemia (loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting, weakness, or feeling very tired). - Fever for no known reason. - Loss of appetite. - Weight loss for no known reason. Wilms tumor that has spread to the lungs or liver may cause the following signs and symptoms: - Cough. - Blood in the sputum. - Trouble breathing. - Pain in the abdomen.
How to diagnose Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors ?
Tests are used to screen for Wilms tumor. Screening tests are done in children with an increased risk of Wilms tumor. These tests may help find cancer early and decrease the chance of dying from cancer. In general, children with an increased risk of Wilms tumor should be screened for Wilms tumor every three months until they are at least 8 years old. An ultrasound test of the abdomen is usually used for screening. Small Wilms tumors may be found and removed before symptoms occur. Children with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome or hemihyperplasia are also screened for liver and adrenal tumors that are linked to these genetic syndromes. A test to check the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level in the blood and an ultrasound of the abdomen are done until the child is 4 years old. An ultrasound of the kidneys is done after the child is 4 years old. In children with certain gene changes, a different schedule for ultrasound of the abdomen may be used. Children with aniridia and a certain gene change are screened for Wilms tumor every three months until they are 8 years old. An ultrasound test of the abdomen is used for screening. Some children develop Wilms tumor in both kidneys. These often appear when Wilms tumor is first diagnosed, but Wilms tumor may also occur in the second kidney after the child is successfully treated for Wilms tumor in one kidney. Children with an increased risk of a second Wilms tumor in the other kidney should be screened for Wilms tumor every three months for up to eight years. An ultrasound test of the abdomen may be used for screening. Tests that examine the kidney and the blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Complete blood count (CBC): A procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - The number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - The amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - The portion of the blood sample made up of red blood cells. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. This test is done to check how well the liver and kidneys are working. - Renal function test : A procedure in which blood or urine samples are checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood or urine by the kidneys. A higher or lower than normal amount of a substance can be a sign that the kidneys are not working as they should. - Urinalysis : A test to check the color of urine and its contents, such as sugar, protein, blood, and bacteria. - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. An ultrasound of the abdomen is done to diagnose a kidney tumor. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye is injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) with gadolinium: A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the abdomen. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - X-ray: An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body, such as the chest and abdomen. - PET-CT scan : A procedure that combines the pictures from a positron emission tomography (PET) scan and a computed tomography (CT) scan. The PET and CT scans are done at the same time on the same machine. The pictures from both scans are combined to make a more detailed picture than either test would make by itself. A PET scan is a procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The decision of whether to do a biopsy is based on the following: - The size of the tumor. - The stage of the cancer. - Whether cancer is in one or both kidneys. - Whether imaging tests clearly show the cancer. - Whether the tumor can be removed by surgery. - Whether the patient is in a clinical trial. A biopsy may be done before any treatment is given, after chemotherapy to shrink the tumor, or after surgery to remove the tumor.
What is the outlook for Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options for Wilms tumor depend on the following: - How different the tumor cells are from normal kidney cells when looked at under a microscope. - The stage of the cancer. - The type of tumor. - The age of the child. - Whether the tumor can be completely removed by surgery. - Whether there are certain changes in chromosomes or genes. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). The prognosis for renal cell cancer depends on the following: - The stage of the cancer. - Whether the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. The prognosis for rhabdoid tumor of the kidney depends on the following: - The age of the child at the time of diagnosis. - The stage of the cancer. - Whether the cancer has spread to the brain or spinal cord. The prognosis for clear cell sarcoma of the kidney depends on the following: - The age of the child at the time of diagnosis. - The stage of the cancer.
What are the stages of Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors ?
  - Wilms tumors are staged during surgery and with imaging tests. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - In addition to the stages, Wilms tumors are described by their histology. - The following stages are used for both favorable histology and anaplastic Wilms tumors: - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV - Stage V - The treatment of other childhood kidney tumors depends on the tumor type. Wilms tumors are staged during surgery and with imaging tests. The process used to find out if cancer has spread outside of the kidney to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The doctor will use results of the diagnostic and staging tests to help find out the stage of the disease. The following tests may be done to see if cancer has spread to other places in the body: - Lymph node biopsy : A surgical procedure in which lymph nodes in the abdomen are removed and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. This procedure is also called lymphadenectomy or lymph node dissection. - Liver function test : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by the liver. A higher than normal amount of a substance can be a sign that the liver is not working as it should. - X-ray of the chest and bones: An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body, such as the chest. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the abdomen, pelvis, chest, and brain, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye is injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - PET-CT scan : A procedure that combines the pictures from a positron emission tomography (PET) scan and a computed tomography (CT) scan. The PET and CT scans are done at the same time on the same machine. The pictures from both scans are combined to make a more detailed picture than either test would make by itself. A PET scan is a procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the abdomen, pelvis, and brain. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in the bones with cancer and is detected by a scanner. - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. An ultrasound of the major heart vessels is done to stage Wilms tumor. - Cystoscopy : A procedure to look inside the bladder and urethra to check for abnormal areas. A cystoscope is inserted through the urethra into the bladder. A cystoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if Wilms tumor spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually Wilms tumor cells. The disease is metastatic Wilms tumor, not lung cancer. In addition to the stages, Wilms tumors are described by their histology. The histology (how the cells look under a microscope) of the tumor affects the prognosis and the treatment of Wilms tumor. The histology may be favorable or anaplastic (unfavorable). Tumors with a favorable histology have a better prognosis and respond better to chemotherapy than anaplastic tumors. Tumor cells that are anaplastic divide quickly and under a microscope do not look like the type of cells they came from. Anaplastic tumors are harder to treat with chemotherapy than other Wilms tumors at the same stage. The following stages are used for both favorable histology and anaplastic Wilms tumors: Stage I In stage I, the tumor was completely removed by surgery and all of the following are true: - Cancer was found only in the kidney and had not spread to blood vessels in the renal sinus (the part of the kidney where it joins the ureter) or to the lymph nodes. - The outer layer of the kidney did not break open. - The tumor did not break open. - A biopsy was not done before the tumor was removed. - No cancer cells were found at the edges of the area where the tumor was removed. Stage II In stage II, the tumor was completely removed by surgery and no cancer cells were found at the edges of the area where the cancer was removed. Cancer has not spread to lymph nodes. Before the tumor was removed, one of the following was true: - Cancer had spread to the renal sinus (the part of the kidney where it joins the ureter). - Cancer had spread to blood vessels outside the area of the kidney where urine is made, such as the renal sinus. Stage III In stage III, cancer remains in the abdomen after surgery and one of the following may be true: - Cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the abdomen or pelvis (the part of the body between the hips). - Cancer has spread to or through the surface of the peritoneum (the layer of tissue that lines the abdominal cavity and covers most organs in the abdomen). - A biopsy of the tumor was done before it was removed. - The tumor broke open before or during surgery to remove it. - The tumor was removed in more than one piece. - Cancer cells are found at the edges of the area where the tumor was removed. - The entire tumor could not be removed because important organs or tissues in the body would be damaged. Stage IV In stage IV, cancer has spread through the blood to organs such as the lungs, liver, bone, or brain, or to lymph nodes outside of the abdomen and pelvis. Stage V In stage V, cancer cells are found in both kidneys when the cancer is first diagnosed. The treatment of other childhood kidney tumors depends on the tumor type.
What are the treatments for Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors. - Children with Wilms tumor or other childhood kidney tumors should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating cancer in children. - Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. - Five types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Biologic therapy - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Targeted therapy - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors. Different types of treatment are available for children with Wilms and other childhood kidney tumors. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Children with Wilms tumor or other childhood kidney tumors should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating cancer in children. Your child's treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health care providers who are experts in treating children with Wilms tumor or other childhood kidney tumors and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. These may include the following specialists: - Pediatrician. - Pediatric surgeon or urologist. - Radiation oncologist. - Rehabilitation specialist. - Pediatric nurse specialist. - Social worker. Some cancer treatments cause side effects months or years after treatment has ended. Side effects from cancer treatment that begin during or after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include the following: - Physical problems, such as heart problems, kidney problems, or problems during pregnancy. - Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. - Second cancers (new types of cancer), such as cancer of the gastrointestinal tract or breast cancer. Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important to talk with your child's doctors about the effects cancer treatment can have on your child. (See the PDQ summary about Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information). Clinical trials are being done to find out if lower doses of chemotherapy and radiation can be used to lessen the late effects of treatment without changing how well the treatment works. Five types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Two types of surgery are used to treat kidney tumors: - Nephrectomy: Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors are usually treated with nephrectomy (surgery to remove the whole kidney). Nearby lymph nodes may also be removed and checked for signs of cancer. Sometimes a kidney transplant (surgery to remove the kidney and replace it with a kidney from a donor) is done when the cancer is in both kidneys and the kidneys are not working well. - Partial nephrectomy: If cancer is found in both kidneys or is likely to spread to both kidneys, surgery may include a partial nephrectomy (removal of the cancer in the kidney and a small amount of normal tissue around it). Partial nephrectomy is done to keep as much of the kidney working as possible. A partial nephrectomy is also called renal-sparing surgery. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk of the cancer coming back, is called adjuvant therapy. Sometimes, a second-look surgery is done to see if cancer remains after chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated and whether a biopsy was done before surgery to remove the tumor. External radiation therapy is used to treat Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Combination chemotherapy is treatment using two or more anticancer drugs. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Systemic chemotherapy is used to treat Wilms tumor and other childhood kidney tumors. Sometimes the tumor cannot be removed by surgery for one of the following reasons: - The tumor is too close to important organs or blood vessels. - The tumor is too large to remove. - The cancer is in both kidneys. - There is a blood clot in the vessels near the liver. - The patient has trouble breathing because cancer has spread to the lungs. In this case, a biopsy is done first. Then chemotherapy is given to reduce the size of the tumor before surgery, in order to save as much healthy tissue as possible and lessen problems after surgery. This is called neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Radiation therapy is given after surgery. See Drugs Approved for Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Cancers for more information. Biologic therapy Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or immunotherapy. Interferon and interleukin-2 (IL-2) are types of biologic therapy used to treat childhood renal cell cancer. Interferon affects the division of cancer cells and can slow tumor growth. IL-2 boosts the growth and activity of many immune cells, especially lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). Lymphocytes can attack and kill cancer cells. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue is a method of giving high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen and stored. After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These re-infused stem cells grow into (and restore) the body's blood cells. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue may be used to treat recurrent Wilms tumor. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Wilms Tumor Stage I Wilms Tumor Treatment of stage I Wilms tumor with favorable histology may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by combination chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of nephrectomy only. Treatment of stage I anaplastic Wilms tumor may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes followed by combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy to the flank area (either side of the body between the ribs and hipbone). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I Wilms tumor. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Stage II Wilms Tumor Treatment of stage II Wilms tumor with favorable histology may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by combination chemotherapy. Treatment of stage II anaplastic Wilms tumor may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by radiation therapy to the abdomen and combination chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II Wilms tumor. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Stage III Wilms Tumor Treatment of stage III Wilms tumor with favorable histology may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by radiation therapy to the abdomen and combination chemotherapy. Treatment of stage III anaplastic Wilms tumor may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by radiation therapy to the abdomen and combination chemotherapy. - Combination chemotherapy followed by nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by radiation therapy to the abdomen. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III Wilms tumor. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Stage IV Wilms Tumor Treatment of stage IV Wilms tumor with favorable histology may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by radiation therapy to the abdomen and combination chemotherapy. If cancer has spread to other parts of the body, patients will also receive radiation therapy to those areas. Treatment of stage IV anaplastic Wilms tumor may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by radiation therapy to the abdomen and combination chemotherapy. If cancer has spread to other parts of the body, patients will also receive radiation therapy to those areas. - Combination chemotherapy given before nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes, followed by radiation therapy to the abdomen. If cancer has spread to other parts of the body, patients will also receive radiation therapy to those areas. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV Wilms tumor. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Stage V Wilms Tumor and patients at high risk of developing bilateral Wilms tumor Treatment of stage V Wilms tumor may be different for each patient and may include: - Combination chemotherapy to shrink the tumor, followed by repeat imaging at 4 to 8 weeks to decide on further therapy (partial nephrectomy, biopsy, continued chemotherapy, and/or radiation therapy). - A biopsy of the kidneys is followed by combination chemotherapy to shrink the tumor. A second surgery is done to remove as much of the cancer as possible. This may be followed by more chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy if cancer remains after surgery. If a kidney transplant is needed because of kidney problems, it is delayed until 1 to 2 years after treatment is completed and there are no signs of cancer. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage V Wilms tumor. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Treatment Options for Other Childhood Kidney Tumors Renal Cell Cancer (RCC) Treatment of renal cell cancer usually includes: - Surgery, which may be: - nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes; or - partial nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes. - Biologic therapy (interferon and interleukin-2) for cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. See the PDQ summary about Renal Cell Cancer Treatment for more information. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with renal cell carcinoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Rhabdoid Tumor of the Kidney There is no standard treatment for rhabdoid tumor of the kidney. Treatment may include: - A combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and/or radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of targeted therapy (tazemetostat). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with rhabdoid tumor of the kidney. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Clear Cell Sarcoma of the Kidney Treatment of clear cell sarcoma of the kidney may include: - Nephrectomy with removal of lymph nodes followed by combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy to the abdomen. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Congenital Mesoblastic Nephroma Treatment for congenital mesoblastic nephroma usually includes: - Surgery that may be followed by chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of targeted therapy (LOXO-101 or entrectinib). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with congenital mesoblastic nephroma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Ewing Sarcoma of the Kidney There is no standard treatment for Ewing sarcoma of the kidney. Treatment may include: - A combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. It may also be treated in the same way that Ewing sarcoma is treated. See the PDQ summary about Ewing Sarcoma Treatment for more information. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. . Primary Renal Myoepithelial Carcinoma There is no standard treatment for primary renal myoepithelial carcinoma. Treatment may include: - A combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Cystic Partially Differentiated Nephroblastoma Treatment of cystic partially differentiated nephroblastoma may include: - Surgery that may be followed by chemotherapy. Multilocular Cystic Nephroma Treatment of multilocular cystic nephroma usually includes: - Surgery. Primary Renal Synovial Sarcoma Treatment of primary renal synovial sarcoma usually includes: - Chemotherapy. Anaplastic Sarcoma of the Kidney There is no standard treatment for anaplastic sarcoma of the kidney. Treatment is usually the same treatment given for anaplastic Wilms tumor. Nephroblastomatosis (Diffuse Hyperplastic Perilobar Nephroblastomatosis) The treatment of nephroblastomatosis depends on the following: - Whether the child has abnormal groups of cells in one or both kidneys. - Whether the child has Wilms tumor in one kidney and groups of abnormal cells in the other kidney. Treatment of nephroblastomatosis may include: - Chemotherapy followed by nephrectomy. Sometimes a partial nephrectomy may be done to keep as much kidney function as possible.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Wilms Tumor and Other Childhood Kidney Tumors ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Targeted therapy used to treat childhood kidney tumors may include the following: - Monoclonal antibodies: This targeted therapy uses antibodies made in the laboratory, from a single type of immune system cell. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. Lorvotuzumab is being studied in the treatment of recurrent Wilms tumor. - Kinase inhibitors: This targeted therapy blocks signals that cancer cells need to grow and divide. LOXO-101 and entrectinib are kinase inhibitors being studied to treat congenital mesoblastic nephroma. - Histone methyltransferase inhibitors: This targeted therapy slows down the cancer cell's ability to grow and divide. Tazemetostat is being studied in the treatment of rhabdoid tumor of the kidney. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Breast Cancer ?
  - Breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. - Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in American women. Breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. The breast is made up of lobes and ducts. Each breast has 15 to 20 sections called lobes, which have many smaller sections called lobules. Lobules end in dozens of tiny bulbs that can make milk. The lobes, lobules, and bulbs are linked by thin tubes called ducts. Each breast also has blood vessels and lymph vessels. The lymph vessels carry an almost colorless fluid called lymph. Lymph vessels lead to organs called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are small bean-shaped structures that are found throughout the body. They filter lymph and store white blood cells that help fight infection and disease. Clusters of lymph nodes are found near the breast in the axilla (under the arm), above the collarbone, and in the chest. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about breast cancer: - Breast Cancer Screening - Breast Cancer Treatment - Breast Cancer Treatment and Pregnancy - Male Breast Cancer Treatment - Genetics of Breast and Ovarian Cancer Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in American women. Women in the United States get breast cancer more than any other type of cancer except skin cancer. Breast cancer is second to lung cancer as a cause of cancer death in American women. However, deaths from breast cancer have decreased a little bit every year between 2003 and 2012. Breast cancer also occurs in men, but the number of new cases is small.
Who is at risk for Breast Cancer? ?
  - Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. - The following are risk factors for breast cancer: - Older age - A personal history of breast cancer or benign (noncancer) breast disease - Inherited risk of breast cancer - Dense breasts - Exposure of breast tissue to estrogen made in the body - Taking hormone therapy for symptoms of menopause - Radiation therapy to the breast or chest - Obesity - Drinking alcohol - The following are protective factors for breast cancer: - Less exposure of breast tissue to estrogen made by the body - Taking estrogen-only hormone therapy after hysterectomy, selective estrogen receptor modulators, or aromatase inhibitors and inactivators - Estrogen-only hormone therapy after hysterectomy - Selective estrogen receptor modulators - Aromatase inhibitors and inactivators - Risk-reducing mastectomy - Ovarian ablation - Getting enough exercise - It is not clear whether the following affect the risk of breast cancer: - Oral contraceptives - Environment - Studies have shown that some factors do not affect the risk of breast cancer. - Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - New ways to prevent breast cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. NCI's Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool uses a woman's risk factors to estimate her risk for breast cancer during the next five years and up to age 90. This online tool is meant to be used by a health care provider. For more information on breast cancer risk, call 1-800-4-CANCER. The following are risk factors for breast cancer: Older age Older age is the main risk factor for most cancers. The chance of getting cancer increases as you get older. A personal history of breast cancer or benign (noncancer) breast disease Women with any of the following have an increased risk of breast cancer: - A personal history of invasive breast cancer, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), or lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). - A personal history of benign (noncancer) breast disease. Inherited risk of breast cancer Women with a family history of breast cancer in a first-degree relative (mother, sister, or daughter) have an increased risk of breast cancer. Women who have inherited changes in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes or in certain other genes have a higher risk of breast cancer. The risk of breast cancer caused by inherited gene changes depends on the type of gene mutation, family history of cancer, and other factors. Dense breasts Having breast tissue that is dense on a mammogram is a factor in breast cancer risk. The level of risk depends on how dense the breast tissue is. Women with very dense breasts have a higher risk of breast cancer than women with low breast density. Increased breast density is often an inherited trait, but it may also occur in women who have not had children, have a first pregnancy late in life, take postmenopausal hormones, or drink alcohol. Exposure of breast tissue to estrogen made in the body Estrogen is a hormone made by the body. It helps the body develop and maintain female sex characteristics. Being exposed to estrogen over a long time may increase the risk of breast cancer. Estrogen levels are highest during the years a woman is menstruating. A woman's exposure to estrogen is increased in the following ways: - Early menstruation: Beginning to have menstrual periods at age 11 or younger increases the number of years the breast tissue is exposed to estrogen. - Starting menopause at a later age: The more years a woman menstruates, the longer her breast tissue is exposed to estrogen. - Older age at first birth or never having given birth: Because estrogen levels are lower during pregnancy, breast tissue is exposed to more estrogen in women who become pregnant for the first time after age 35 or who never become pregnant. Taking hormone therapy for symptoms of menopause Hormones, such as estrogen and progesterone, can be made into a pill form in a laboratory. Estrogen, progestin, or both may be given to replace the estrogen no longer made by the ovaries in postmenopausal women or women who have had their ovaries removed. This is called hormone replacement therapy (HRT) or hormone therapy (HT). Combination HRT/HT is estrogen combined with progestin. This type of HRT/HT increases the risk of breast cancer. Studies show that when women stop taking estrogen combined with progestin, the risk of breast cancer decreases. Radiation therapy to the breast or chest Radiation therapy to the chest for the treatment of cancer increases the risk of breast cancer, starting 10 years after treatment. The risk of breast cancer depends on the dose of radiation and the age at which it is given. The risk is highest if radiation treatment was used during puberty, when breasts are forming. Radiation therapy to treat cancer in one breast does not appear to increase the risk of cancer in the other breast. For women who have inherited changes in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, exposure to radiation, such as that from chest x-rays, may further increase the risk of breast cancer, especially in women who were x-rayed before 20 years of age. Obesity Obesity increases the risk of breast cancer, especially in postmenopausal women who have not used hormone replacement therapy. Drinking alcohol Drinking alcohol increases the risk of breast cancer. The level of risk rises as the amount of alcohol consumed rises. The following are protective factors for breast cancer: Less exposure of breast tissue to estrogen made by the body Decreasing the length of time a woman's breast tissue is exposed to estrogen may help prevent breast cancer. Exposure to estrogen is reduced in the following ways: - Early pregnancy: Estrogen levels are lower during pregnancy. Women who have a full-term pregnancy before age 20 have a lower risk of breast cancer than women who have not had children or who give birth to their first child after age 35. - Breast-feeding: Estrogen levels may remain lower while a woman is breast-feeding. Women who breastfed have a lower risk of breast cancer than women who have had children but did not breastfeed. Taking estrogen-only hormone therapy after hysterectomy, selective estrogen receptor modulators, or aromatase inhibitors and inactivators Estrogen-only hormone therapy after hysterectomy Hormone therapy with estrogen only may be given to women who have had a hysterectomy. In these women, estrogen-only therapy after menopause may decrease the risk of breast cancer. There is an increased risk of stroke and heart and blood vessel disease in postmenopausal women who take estrogen after a hysterectomy. Selective estrogen receptor modulators Tamoxifen and raloxifene belong to the family of drugs called selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs). SERMs act like estrogen on some tissues in the body, but block the effect of estrogen on other tissues. Treatment with tamoxifen lowers the risk of estrogen receptor-positive (ER-positive) breast cancer and ductal carcinoma in situ in premenopausal and postmenopausal women at high risk. Treatment with raloxifene also lowers the risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. With either drug, the reduced risk lasts for several years or longer after treatment is stopped. Lower rates of broken bones have been noted in patients taking raloxifene. Taking tamoxifen increases the risk of hot flashes, endometrial cancer, stroke, cataracts, and blood clots (especially in the lungs and legs). The risk of having these problems increases markedly in women older than 50 years compared with younger women. Women younger than 50 years who have a high risk of breast cancer may benefit the most from taking tamoxifen. The risk of having these problems decreases after tamoxifen is stopped. Talk with your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking this drug. Taking raloxifene increases the risk of blood clots in the lungs and legs, but does not appear to increase the risk of endometrial cancer. In postmenopausal women with osteoporosis (decreased bone density), raloxifene lowers the risk of breast cancer for women who have a high or low risk of breast cancer. It is not known if raloxifene would have the same effect in women who do not have osteoporosis. Talk with your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking this drug. Other SERMs are being studied in clinical trials. Aromatase inhibitors and inactivators Aromatase inhibitors (anastrozole, letrozole) and inactivators (exemestane) lower the risk of recurrence and of new breast cancers in women who have a history of breast cancer. Aromatase inhibitors also decrease the risk of breast cancer in women with the following conditions: - Postmenopausal women with a personal history of breast cancer. - Women with no personal history of breast cancer who are 60 years and older, have a history of ductal carcinoma in situ with mastectomy, or have a high risk of breast cancer based on the Gail model tool (a tool used to estimate the risk of breast cancer). In women with an increased risk of breast cancer, taking aromatase inhibitors decreases the amount of estrogen made by the body. Before menopause, estrogen is made by the ovaries and other tissues in a woman's body, including the brain, fat tissue, and skin. After menopause, the ovaries stop making estrogen, but the other tissues do not. Aromatase inhibitors block the action of an enzyme called aromatase, which is used to make all of the body's estrogen. Aromatase inactivators stop the enzyme from working. Possible harms from taking aromatase inhibitors include muscle and joint pain, osteoporosis, hot flashes, and feeling very tired. Risk-reducing mastectomy Some women who have a high risk of breast cancer may choose to have a risk-reducing mastectomy (the removal of both breasts when there are no signs of cancer). The risk of breast cancer is much lower in these women and most feel less anxious about their risk of breast cancer. However, it is very important to have a cancer risk assessment and counseling about the different ways to prevent breast cancer before making this decision. Ovarian ablation The ovaries make most of the estrogen that is made by the body. Treatments that stop or lower the amount of estrogen made by the ovaries include surgery to remove the ovaries, radiation therapy, or taking certain drugs. This is called ovarian ablation. Premenopausal women who have a high risk of breast cancer due to certain changes in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes may choose to have a risk-reducing oophorectomy (the removal of both ovaries when there are no signs of cancer). This decreases the amount of estrogen made by the body and lowers the risk of breast cancer. Risk-reducing oophorectomy also lowers the risk of breast cancer in normal premenopausal women and in women with an increased risk of breast cancer due to radiation to the chest. However, it is very important to have a cancer risk assessment and counseling before making this decision. The sudden drop in estrogen levels may cause the symptoms of menopause to begin. These include hot flashes, trouble sleeping, anxiety, and depression. Long-term effects include decreased sex drive, vaginal dryness, and decreased bone density. Getting enough exercise Women who exercise four or more hours a week have a lower risk of breast cancer. The effect of exercise on breast cancer risk may be greatest in premenopausal women who have normal or low body weight. It is not clear whether the following affect the risk of breast cancer: Oral contraceptives Certain oral contraceptives contain estrogen. Some studies have shown that taking oral contraceptives ("the pill") may slightly increase the risk of breast cancer in current users. This risk decreases over time. Other studies have not shown an increased risk of breast cancer in women who take oral contraceptives. Progestin -only contraceptives that are injected or implanted do not appear to increase the risk of breast cancer. More studies are needed to know whether progestin-only oral contraceptives increase the risk of breast cancer. Environment Studies have not proven that being exposed to certain substances in the environment, such as chemicals, increases the risk of breast cancer. Studies have shown that some factors do not affect the risk of breast cancer. The following do not affect the risk of breast cancer: - Having an abortion. - Making diet changes such as eating less fat or more fruits and vegetables. - Taking vitamins, including fenretinide (a type of vitamin A). - Cigarette smoking, both active and passive (inhaling secondhand smoke). - Using underarm deodorant or antiperspirant. - Taking statins (cholesterol -lowering drugs). - Taking bisphosphonates (drugs used to treat osteoporosis and hypercalcemia) by mouth or by intravenous infusion.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Breast Cancer ?
Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include exercising more or quitting smoking or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. New ways to prevent breast cancer are being studied in clinical trials.
What is are Breast Cancer ?
  - Breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. - Sometimes breast cancer occurs in women who are pregnant or have just given birth. - Signs of breast cancer include a lump or change in the breast. - It may be difficult to detect (find) breast cancer early in pregnant or nursing women. - Breast exams should be part of prenatal and postnatal care. - Tests that examine the breasts are used to detect (find) and diagnose breast cancer. - If cancer is found, tests are done to study the cancer cells. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. The breast is made up of lobes and ducts. Each breast has 15 to 20 sections called lobes. Each lobe has many smaller sections called lobules. Lobules end in dozens of tiny bulbs that can make milk. The lobes, lobules, and bulbs are linked by thin tubes called ducts. Each breast also has blood vessels and lymph vessels. The lymph vessels carry an almost colorless fluid called lymph. Lymph vessels carry lymph between lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are small bean-shaped structures that are found throughout the body. They filter substances in lymph and help fight infection and disease. Clusters of lymph nodes are found near the breast in the axilla (under the arm), above the collarbone, and in the chest. It may be difficult to detect (find) breast cancer early in pregnant or nursing women. The breasts usually get larger, tender, or lumpy in women who are pregnant, nursing, or have just given birth. This occurs because of normal hormone changes that take place during pregnancy. These changes can make small lumps difficult to detect. The breasts may also become denser. It is more difficult to detect breast cancer in women with dense breasts using mammography. Because these breast changes can delay diagnosis, breast cancer is often found at a later stage in these women. Other Information About Pregnancy and Breast Cancer   - Lactation (breast milk production) and breast-feeding should be stopped if surgery or chemotherapy is planned. - Breast cancer does not appear to harm the unborn baby. - Pregnancy does not seem to affect the survival of women who have had breast cancer in the past. Lactation (breast milk production) and breast-feeding should be stopped if surgery or chemotherapy is planned. If surgery is planned, breast-feeding should be stopped to reduce blood flow in the breasts and make them smaller. Breast-feeding should also be stopped if chemotherapy is planned. Many anticancer drugs, especially cyclophosphamide and methotrexate, may occur in high levels in breast milk and may harm the nursing baby. Women receiving chemotherapy should not breast-feed. Stopping lactation does not improve the mother's prognosis. Breast cancer does not appear to harm the unborn baby. Breast cancer cells do not seem to pass from the mother to the unborn baby. Pregnancy does not seem to affect the survival of women who have had breast cancer in the past. For women who have had breast cancer, pregnancy does not seem to affect their survival. However, some doctors recommend that a woman wait 2 years after treatment for breast cancer before trying to have a baby, so that any early return of the cancer would be detected. This may affect a womans decision to become pregnant. The unborn baby does not seem to be affected if the mother has had breast cancer.
Who is at risk for Breast Cancer? ?
Sometimes breast cancer occurs in women who are pregnant or have just given birth. Breast cancer occurs about once in every 3,000 pregnancies. It occurs most often between the ages of 32 and 38.
What are the symptoms of Breast Cancer ?
Signs of breast cancer include a lump or change in the breast. These and other signs may be caused by breast cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - A lump or thickening in or near the breast or in the underarm area. - A change in the size or shape of the breast. - A dimple or puckering in the skin of the breast. - A nipple turned inward into the breast. - Fluid, other than breast milk, from the nipple, especially if it's bloody. - Scaly, red, or swollen skin on the breast, nipple, or areola (the dark area of skin around the nipple). - Dimples in the breast that look like the skin of an orange, called peau dorange. It may be difficult to detect (find) breast cancer early in pregnant or nursing women. The breasts usually get larger, tender, or lumpy in women who are pregnant, nursing, or have just given birth. This occurs because of normal hormone changes that take place during pregnancy. These changes can make small lumps difficult to detect. The breasts may also become denser. It is more difficult to detect breast cancer in women with dense breasts using mammography. Because these breast changes can delay diagnosis, breast cancer is often found at a later stage in these women.
What is the outlook for Breast Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options.The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (the size of the tumor and whether it is in the breast only or has spread to other parts of the body). - The type of breast cancer. - The age of the unborn baby. - Whether there are signs or symptoms. - The patients general health.
What are the stages of Breast Cancer ?
  - After breast cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for breast cancer: - Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage IIIA - Stage IIIB - Stage IIIC - Stage IV After breast cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if the cancer has spread within the breast or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. Some procedures may expose the unborn baby to harmful radiation or dyes. These procedures are done only if absolutely necessary. Certain actions can be taken to expose the unborn baby to as little radiation as possible, such as the use of a lead-lined shield to cover the abdomen. The following tests and procedures may be used to stage breast cancer during pregnancy: - Sentinel lymph node biopsy : The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in bones with cancer and is detected by a scanner. - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the brain. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs, such as the liver, and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if breast cancer spreads to the bone, the cancer cells in the bone are actually breast cancer cells. The disease is metastatic breast cancer, not bone cancer. The following stages are used for breast cancer: This section describes the stages of breast cancer. The breast cancer stage is based on the results of testing that is done on the tumor and lymph nodes removed during surgery and other tests. Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) There are 3 types of breast carcinoma in situ: - Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a noninvasive condition in which abnormal cells are found in the lining of a breast duct. The abnormal cells have not spread outside the duct to other tissues in the breast. In some cases, DCIS may become invasive cancer and spread to other tissues. At this time, there is no way to know which lesions could become invasive. - Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a condition in which abnormal cells are found in the lobules of the breast. This condition seldom becomes invasive cancer. However, having LCIS in one breast increases the risk of developing breast cancer in either breast. - Paget disease of the nipple is a condition in which abnormal cells are found in the nipple only. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed. Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB. - In stage IA, the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has not spread outside the breast. - In stage IB, small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes and either: - no tumor is found in the breast; or - the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Stage II Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB. - In stage IIA: - no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer (larger than 2 millimeters) is found in 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or in the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy); or - the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. - In stage IIB, the tumor is: - larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes; or - larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or to the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy); or - larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. Stage IIIA In stage IIIA: - no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor may be any size. Cancer is found in 4 to 9 axillary lymph nodes or in the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during imaging tests or a physical exam); or - the tumor is larger than 5 centimeters. Small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes; or - the tumor is larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or to the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy). Stage IIIB In stage IIIB, the tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to the chest wall and/or to the skin of the breast and caused swelling or an ulcer. Also, cancer may have spread to: - up to 9 axillary lymph nodes; or - the lymph nodes near the breastbone. Cancer that has spread to the skin of the breast may also be inflammatory breast cancer. See the section on Inflammatory Breast Cancer for more information. Stage IIIC In stage IIIC, no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor may be any size. Cancer may have spread to the skin of the breast and caused swelling or an ulcer and/or has spread to the chest wall. Also, cancer has spread to: - 10 or more axillary lymph nodes; or - lymph nodes above or below the collarbone; or - axillary lymph nodes and lymph nodes near the breastbone. Cancer that has spread to the skin of the breast may also be inflammatory breast cancer. See the section on Inflammatory Breast Cancer for more information. For treatment, stage IIIC breast cancer is divided into operable and inoperable stage IIIC. Stage IV In stage IV, cancer has spread to other organs of the body, most often the bones, lungs, liver, or brain.
What are the treatments for Breast Cancer ?
  - Treatment options for pregnant women depend on the stage of the disease and the age of the unborn baby. - Three types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Ending the pregnancy does not seem to improve the mothers chance of survival. - Treatment for breast cancer may cause side effects. Treatment options for pregnant women depend on the stage of the disease and the age of the unborn baby. Three types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Most pregnant women with breast cancer have surgery to remove the breast. Some of the lymph nodes under the arm may be removed and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. Types of surgery to remove the cancer include: - Modified radical mastectomy: Surgery to remove the whole breast that has cancer, many of the lymph nodes under the arm, the lining over the chest muscles, and sometimes, part of the chest wall muscles. This type of surgery is most common in pregnant women. - Breast-conserving surgery: Surgery to remove the cancer and some normal tissue around it, but not the breast itself. Part of the chest wall lining may also be removed if the cancer is near it. This type of surgery may also be called lumpectomy, partial mastectomy, segmental mastectomy, quadrantectomy, or breast-sparing surgery. Even if the doctor removes all of the cancer that can be seen at the time of surgery, the patient may be given radiation therapy or chemotherapy after surgery to try to kill any cancer cells that may be left. For pregnant women with early-stage breast cancer, radiation therapy and hormone therapy are given after the baby is born. Treatment given after surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is not given to pregnant women with early stage (stage I or II) breast cancer because it can harm the unborn baby. For women with late stage (stage III or IV) breast cancer, radiation therapy is not given during the first 3 months of pregnancy and is delayed until after the baby is born, if possible. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Chemotherapy is usually not given during the first 3 months of pregnancy. Chemotherapy given after this time does not usually harm the unborn baby but may cause early labor and low birth weight. See Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer for more information. Ending the pregnancy does not seem to improve the mothers chance of survival. Because ending the pregnancy is not likely to improve the mothers chance of survival, it is not usually a treatment option. Treatment for breast cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Treatment Options by Stage Early Stage Breast Cancer (Stage I and Stage II) Treatment of early-stage breast cancer (stage I and stage II) may include the following: - Modified radical mastectomy. - Breast-conserving surgery followed by radiation therapy. In pregnant women, radiation therapy is delayed until after the baby is born. - Modified radical mastectomy or breast-conserving surgery during pregnancy followed by chemotherapy after the first 3 months of pregnancy. Late Stage Breast Cancer (Stage III and Stage IV) Treatment of late-stage breast cancer (stage III and stage IV) may include the following: - Radiation therapy. - Chemotherapy. Radiation therapy and chemotherapy should not be given during the first 3 months of pregnancy.
What is are Male Breast Cancer ?
  - Male breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. - Radiation exposure, high levels of estrogen, and a family history of breast cancer can increase a mans risk of breast cancer. - Male breast cancer is sometimes caused by inherited gene mutations (changes). - Men with breast cancer usually have lumps that can be felt. - Tests that examine the breasts are used to detect (find) and diagnose breast cancer in men. - If cancer is found, tests are done to study the cancer cells. - Survival for men with breast cancer is similar to survival for women with breast cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Male breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. Breast cancer may occur in men. Men at any age may develop breast cancer, but it is usually detected (found) in men between 60 and 70 years of age. Male breast cancer makes up less than 1% of all cases of breast cancer. The following types of breast cancer are found in men: - Infiltrating ductal carcinoma: Cancer that has spread beyond the cells lining ducts in the breast. Most men with breast cancer have this type of cancer. - Ductal carcinoma in situ: Abnormal cells that are found in the lining of a duct; also called intraductal carcinoma. - Inflammatory breast cancer: A type of cancer in which the breast looks red and swollen and feels warm. - Paget disease of the nipple: A tumor that has grown from ducts beneath the nipple onto the surface of the nipple. Lobular carcinoma in situ (abnormal cells found in one of the lobes or sections of the breast), which sometimes occurs in women, has not been seen in men. Men with breast cancer usually have lumps that can be felt. Lumps and other signs may be caused by male breast cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you notice a change in your breasts.
Who is at risk for Male Breast Cancer? ?
Radiation exposure, high levels of estrogen, and a family history of breast cancer can increase a mans risk of breast cancer. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for breast cancer in men may include the following: - Being exposed to radiation. - Having a disease linked to high levels of estrogen in the body, such as cirrhosis (liver disease) or Klinefelter syndrome (a genetic disorder.) - Having several female relatives who have had breast cancer, especially relatives who have an alteration of the BRCA2 gene.
Is Male Breast Cancer inherited ?
Male breast cancer is sometimes caused by inherited gene mutations (changes).The genes in cells carry the hereditary information that is received from a persons parents. Hereditary breast cancer makes up about 5% to 10% of all breast cancer. Some mutated genes related to breast cancer are more common in certain ethnic groups. Men who have a mutated gene related to breast cancer have an increased risk of this disease. There are tests that can detect (find) mutated genes. These genetic tests are sometimes done for members of families with a high risk of cancer. See the following PDQ summaries for more information: - Genetics of Breast and Gynecologic Cancers - Breast Cancer Prevention - Breast Cancer Screening
What are the symptoms of Male Breast Cancer ?
Men with breast cancer usually have lumps that can be felt.Lumps and other signs may be caused by male breast cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you notice a change in your breasts.
How to diagnose Male Breast Cancer ?
Tests that examine the breasts are used to detect (find) and diagnose breast cancer in men. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Clinical breast exam (CBE): An exam of the breast by a doctor or other health professional. The doctor will carefully feel the breasts and under the arms for lumps or anything else that seems unusual. - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The following are different types of biopsies: - Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy : The removal of tissue or fluid using a thin needle. - Core biopsy : The removal of tissue using a wide needle. - Excisional biopsy : The removal of an entire lump of tissue. If cancer is found, tests are done to study the cancer cells. Decisions about the best treatment are based on the results of these tests. The tests give information about: - How quickly the cancer may grow. - How likely it is that the cancer will spread through the body. - How well certain treatments might work. - How likely the cancer is to recur (come back). Tests include the following: - Estrogen and progesterone receptor test : A test to measure the amount of estrogen and progesterone (hormones) receptors in cancer tissue. If cancer is found in the breast, tissue from the tumor is checked in the laboratory to find out whether estrogen and progesterone could affect the way cancer grows. The test results show whether hormone therapy may stop the cancer from growing. - HER2 test: A test to measure the amount of HER2 in cancer tissue. HER2 is a growth factor protein that sends growth signals to cells. When cancer forms, the cells may make too much of the protein, causing more cancer cells to grow. If cancer is found in the breast, tissue from the tumor is checked in the laboratory to find out if there is too much HER2 in the cells. The test results show whether monoclonal antibody therapy may stop the cancer from growing.
What is the outlook for Male Breast Cancer ?
Survival for men with breast cancer is similar to survival for women with breast cancer. Survival for men with breast cancer is similar to that for women with breast cancer when their stage at diagnosis is the same. Breast cancer in men, however, is often diagnosed at a later stage. Cancer found at a later stage may be less likely to be cured. Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (whether it is in the breast only or has spread to other places in the body). - The type of breast cancer. - Estrogen-receptor and progesterone-receptor levels in the tumor tissue. - Whether the cancer is also found in the other breast. - The patients age and general health.
What are the stages of Male Breast Cancer ?
  - After breast cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for male breast cancer: - Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage IIIA - Stage IIIB - Stage IIIC - Stage IV After breast cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. After breast cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. This process is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. Breast cancer in men is staged the same as it is in women. The spread of cancer from the breast to lymph nodes and other parts of the body appears to be similar in men and women. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - Sentinel lymph node biopsy : The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in the bones and is detected by a scanner. - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if breast cancer spreads to the bone, the cancer cells in the bone are actually breast cancer cells. The disease is metastatic breast cancer, not bone cancer. The following stages are used for male breast cancer: This section describes the stages of breast cancer. The breast cancer stage is based on the results of testing that is done on the tumor and lymph nodes removed during surgery and other tests. Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) There are 3 types of breast carcinoma in situ: - Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a noninvasive condition in which abnormal cells are found in the lining of a breast duct. The abnormal cells have not spread outside the duct to other tissues in the breast. In some cases, DCIS may become invasive cancer and spread to other tissues. At this time, there is no way to know which lesions could become invasive. - Paget disease of the nipple is a condition in which abnormal cells are found in the nipple only. - Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a condition in which abnormal cells are found in the lobules of the breast. This condition has not been seen in men. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed. Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB. - In stage IA, the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has not spread outside the breast. - In stage IB, small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes and either: - no tumor is found in the breast; or - the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Stage II Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB. - In stage IIA - no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer (larger than 2 millimeters) is found in 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or in the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy); or - the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. - In stage IIB, the tumor is: - larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes; or - larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or to the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy); or - larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. Stage IIIA In stage IIIA: - no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor may be any size. Cancer is found in 4 to 9 axillary lymph nodes or in the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during imaging tests or a physical exam); or - the tumor is larger than 5 centimeters. Small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes; or - the tumor is larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or to the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy). Stage IIIB In stage IIIB, the tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to the chest wall and/or to the skin of the breast and caused swelling or an ulcer. Also, cancer may have spread to : - up to 9 axillary lymph nodes; or - the lymph nodes near the breastbone. Cancer that has spread to the skin of the breast may also be inflammatory breast cancer. See the section on Inflammatory Male Breast Cancer for more information. Stage IIIC In stage IIIC, no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor may be any size. Cancer may have spread to the skin of the breast and caused swelling or an ulcer and/or has spread to the chest wall. Also, cancer has spread to: - 10 or more axillary lymph nodes; or - lymph nodes above or below the collarbone; or - axillary lymph nodes and lymph nodes near the breastbone. Cancer that has spread to the skin of the breast may also be inflammatory breast cancer. See the section on Inflammatory Male Breast Cancer for more information. For treatment, stage IIIC breast cancer is divided into operable and inoperable stage IIIC. Stage IV In stage IV, cancer has spread to other organs of the body, most often the bones, lungs, liver, or brain.
What are the treatments for Male Breast Cancer ?
  - There are different types of treatment for men with breast cancer. - Five types of standard treatment are used to treat men with breast cancer: - Surgery - Chemotherapy - Hormone therapy - Radiation therapy - Targeted therapy - Treatment for male breast cancer may cause side effects. There are different types of treatment for men with breast cancer. Different types of treatment are available for men with breast cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Choosing the most appropriate cancer treatment is a decision that ideally involves the patient, family, and health care team. Five types of standard treatment are used to treat men with breast cancer: Surgery Surgery for men with breast cancer is usually a modified radical mastectomy (removal of the breast, many of the lymph nodes under the arm, the lining over the chest muscles, and sometimes part of the chest wall muscles). Breast-conserving surgery, an operation to remove the cancer but not the breast itself, is also used for some men with breast cancer. A lumpectomy is done to remove the tumor (lump) and a small amount of normal tissue around it. Radiation therapy is given after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. See Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer for more information. Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a cancer treatment that removes hormones or blocks their action and stops cancer cells from growing. Hormones are substances made by glands in the body and circulated in the bloodstream. Some hormones can cause certain cancers to grow. If tests show that the cancer cells have places where hormones can attach (receptors), drugs, surgery, or radiation therapy is used to reduce the production of hormones or block them from working. See Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat male breast cancer. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Monoclonal antibody therapy is a type of targeted therapy used to treat men with breast cancer. Monoclonal antibody therapy uses antibodies made in the laboratory from a single type of immune system cell. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. Monoclonal antibodies are also used with chemotherapy as adjuvant therapy (treatment given after surgery to lower the risk that the cancer will come back). Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that blocks the effects of the growth factor protein HER2. See Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer for more information. Treatment for male breast cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Treatment Options for Male Breast Cancer Initial Surgery Treatment for men diagnosed with breast cancer is usually modified radical mastectomy. Breast-conserving surgery with lumpectomy may be used for some men. Adjuvant Therapy Therapy given after an operation when cancer cells can no longer be seen is called adjuvant therapy. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the operation, the patient may be given radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and/or targeted therapy after surgery, to try to kill any cancer cells that may be left. - Node-negative: For men whose cancer is node-negative (cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes), adjuvant therapy should be considered on the same basis as for a woman with breast cancer because there is no evidence that response to therapy is different for men and women. - Node-positive: For men whose cancer is node-positive (cancer has spread to the lymph nodes), adjuvant therapy may include the following: - Chemotherapy plus tamoxifen (to block the effect of estrogen). - Other hormone therapy. - Targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody (trastuzumab). These treatments appear to increase survival in men as they do in women. The patients response to hormone therapy depends on whether there are hormone receptors (proteins) in the tumor. Most breast cancers in men have these receptors. Hormone therapy is usually recommended for male breast cancer patients, but it can have many side effects, including hot flashes and impotence (the inability to have an erection adequate for sexual intercourse). Distant Metastases Treatment for men with distant metastases (cancer that has spread to other parts of the body) may be hormone therapy, chemotherapy, or both. Hormone therapy may include the following: - Orchiectomy (the removal of the testicles to decrease the amount of hormone made). - Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist with or without total androgen blockade (to decrease the the amount of sex hormones made). - Tamoxifen for cancer that is estrogen-receptor positive. - Progestin (a female hormone made in a laboratory). - Aromatase inhibitors (to decrease the amount of estrogen made). Hormone therapies may be used in sequence (one after the other). Standard chemotherapy regimens may be used if hormone therapy does not work. Men usually respond to therapy in the same way as women who have breast cancer.
What is are Breast Cancer ?
  - Breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. - A family history of breast cancer and other factors increase the risk of breast cancer. - Breast cancer is sometimes caused by inherited gene mutations (changes). - The use of certain medicines and other factors decrease the risk of breast cancer. - Signs of breast cancer include a lump or change in the breast. - Tests that examine the breasts are used to detect (find) and diagnose breast cancer. - If cancer is found, tests are done to study the cancer cells. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Breast cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the breast. The breast is made up of lobes and ducts. Each breast has 15 to 20 sections called lobes. Each lobe has many smaller sections called lobules. Lobules end in dozens of tiny bulbs that can make milk. The lobes, lobules, and bulbs are linked by thin tubes called ducts. Each breast also has blood vessels and lymph vessels. The lymph vessels carry an almost colorless fluid called lymph. Lymph vessels carry lymph between lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are small bean-shaped structures that are found throughout the body. They filter substances in lymph and help fight infection and disease. Clusters of lymph nodes are found near the breast in the axilla (under the arm), above the collarbone, and in the chest. The most common type of breast cancer is ductal carcinoma, which begins in the cells of the ducts. Cancer that begins in the lobes or lobules is called lobular carcinoma and is more often found in both breasts than are other types of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer is an uncommon type of breast cancer in which the breast is warm, red, and swollen. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about breast cancer: - Breast Cancer Prevention - Breast Cancer Screening - Breast Cancer Treatment and Pregnancy - Male Breast Cancer Treatment - Unusual Cancers of Childhood Treatment (for information about breast cancer in childhood)
Who is at risk for Breast Cancer? ?
A family history of breast cancer and other factors increase the risk of breast cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk to your doctor if you think you may be at risk for breast cancer. Risk factors for breast cancer include the following: - A personal history of invasive breast cancer, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), or lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). - A personal history of benign (noncancer) breast disease. - A family history of breast cancer in a first-degree relative (mother, daughter, or sister). - Inherited changes in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes or in other genes that increase the risk of breast cancer. - Breast tissue that is dense on a mammogram. - Exposure of breast tissue to estrogen made by the body. This may be caused by: - Menstruating at an early age. - Older age at first birth or never having given birth. - Starting menopause at a later age. - Taking hormones such as estrogen combined with progestin for symptoms of menopause. - Treatment with radiation therapy to the breast/chest. - Drinking alcohol. - Obesity. Older age is the main risk factor for most cancers. The chance of getting cancer increases as you get older. NCI's Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool uses a woman's risk factors to estimate her risk for breast cancer during the next five years and up to age 90. This online tool is meant to be used by a health care provider. For more information on breast cancer risk, call 1-800-4-CANCER.
How to prevent Breast Cancer ?
The use of certain medicines and other factors decrease the risk of breast cancer. Anything that decreases your chance of getting a disease is called a protective factor. Protective factors for breast cancer include the following: - Taking any of the following: - Estrogen-only hormone therapy after a hysterectomy. - Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs). - Aromatase inhibitors. - Less exposure of breast tissue to estrogen made by the body. This can be a result of: - Early pregnancy. - Breastfeeding. - Getting enough exercise. - Having any of the following procedures: - Mastectomy to reduce the risk of cancer. - Oophorectomy to reduce the risk of cancer. - Ovarian ablation.
Is Breast Cancer inherited ?
Breast cancer is sometimes caused by inherited gene mutations (changes). The genes in cells carry the hereditary information that is received from a persons parents. Hereditary breast cancer makes up about 5% to 10% of all breast cancer. Some mutated genes related to breast cancer are more common in certain ethnic groups. Women who have certain gene mutations, such as a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, have an increased risk of breast cancer. These women also have an increased risk of ovarian cancer, and may have an increased risk of other cancers. Men who have a mutated gene related to breast cancer also have an increased risk of breast cancer. For more information, see the PDQ summary on Male Breast Cancer Treatment. There are tests that can detect (find) mutated genes. These genetic tests are sometimes done for members of families with a high risk of cancer. See the PDQ summary on Genetics of Breast and Gynecologic Cancers for more information.
What are the symptoms of Breast Cancer ?
Signs of breast cancer include a lump or change in the breast. These and other signs may be caused by breast cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - A lump or thickening in or near the breast or in the underarm area. - A change in the size or shape of the breast. - A dimple or puckering in the skin of the breast. - A nipple turned inward into the breast. - Fluid, other than breast milk, from the nipple, especially if it's bloody. - Scaly, red, or swollen skin on the breast, nipple, or areola (the dark area of skin around the nipple). - Dimples in the breast that look like the skin of an orange, called peau dorange.
How to diagnose Breast Cancer ?
Tests that examine the breasts are used to detect (find) and diagnose breast cancer. Check with your doctor if you notice any changes in your breasts. The following tests and procedures may be used: Physical exam and history: An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. Clinical breast exam (CBE): An exam of the breast by a doctor or other health professional. The doctor will carefully feel the breasts and under the arms for lumps or anything else that seems unusual. Mammogram: An x-ray of the breast. Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of both breasts. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. If a lump in the breast is found, a biopsy may be done. There are four types of biopsy used to check for breast cancer: - Excisional biopsy : The removal of an entire lump of tissue. - Incisional biopsy : The removal of part of a lump or a sample of tissue. - Core biopsy : The removal of tissue using a wide needle. - Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy : The removal of tissue or fluid, using a thin needle. If cancer is found, tests are done to study the cancer cells. Decisions about the best treatment are based on the results of these tests. The tests give information about: - how quickly the cancer may grow. - how likely it is that the cancer will spread through the body. - how well certain treatments might work. - how likely the cancer is to recur (come back). Tests include the following: - Estrogen and progesterone receptor test : A test to measure the amount of estrogen and progesterone (hormones) receptors in cancer tissue. If there are more estrogen and progesterone receptors than normal, the cancer is called estrogen and/or progesterone receptor positive. This type of breast cancer may grow more quickly. The test results show whether treatment to block estrogen and progesterone may stop the cancer from growing. - Human epidermal growth factor type 2 receptor (HER2-neu) test : A laboratory test to measure how many HER2-neu genes there are and how much HER2-neu protein is made in a sample of tissue. If there are more HER2-neu genes or higher levels of HER2-neu protein than normal, the cancer is called HER2-neu positive. This type of breast cancer may grow more quickly and is more likely to spread to other parts of the body. The cancer may be treated with drugs that target the HER2-neu protein, such as trastuzumab and pertuzumab. - Multigene tests: Tests in which samples of tissue are studied to look at the activity of many genes at the same time. These tests may help predict whether cancer will spread to other parts of the body or recur (come back). There are many types of multigene tests. The following multigene tests have been studied in clinical trials: - Oncotype DX : This test helps predict whether stage I or stage II breast cancer that is estrogen receptor positive and node negative will spread to other parts of the body. If the risk that the cancer will spread is high, chemotherapy may be given to lower the risk. - MammaPrint : This test helps predict whether stage I or stage II breast cancer that is node negative will spread to other parts of the body. If the risk that the cancer will spread is high, chemotherapy may be given to lower the risk. Based on these tests, breast cancer is described as one of the following types: - Hormone receptor positive (estrogen and/or progesterone receptor positive) or hormone receptor negative (estrogen and/or progesterone receptor negative). - HER2-neu positive or HER2-neu negative. - Triple negative (estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2-neu negative). This information helps the doctor decide which treatments will work best for your cancer.
What is the outlook for Breast Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (the size of the tumor and whether it is in the breast only or has spread to lymph nodes or other places in the body). - The type of breast cancer. - Estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor levels in the tumor tissue. - Human epidermal growth factor type 2 receptor (HER2-neu) levels in the tumor tissue. - Whether the tumor tissue is triple negative (cells that do not have estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, or high levels of HER2-neu). - How fast the tumor is growing. - How likely the tumor is to recur (come back). - A womans age, general health, and menopausal status (whether a woman is still having menstrual periods). - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Breast Cancer ?
  - After breast cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for breast cancer: - Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage IIIA - Stage IIIB - Stage IIIC - Stage IV - The treatment of breast cancer depends partly on the stage of the disease. After breast cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out whether the cancer has spread within the breast or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The results of some of the tests used to diagnose breast cancer are also used to stage the disease. (See the General Information section.) The following tests and procedures also may be used in the staging process: - Sentinel lymph node biopsy : The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in the bones and is detected by a scanner. - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if breast cancer spreads to the bone, the cancer cells in the bone are actually breast cancer cells. The disease is metastatic breast cancer, not bone cancer. The following stages are used for breast cancer: This section describes the stages of breast cancer. The breast cancer stage is based on the results of tests that are done on the tumor and lymph nodes removed during surgery and on other tests. Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) There are 3 types of breast carcinoma in situ: - Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a noninvasive condition in which abnormal cells are found in the lining of a breast duct. The abnormal cells have not spread outside the duct to other tissues in the breast. In some cases, DCIS may become invasive cancer and spread to other tissues. At this time, there is no way to know which lesions could become invasive. - Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a condition in which abnormal cells are found in the lobules of the breast. This condition seldom becomes invasive cancer. Information about LCIS is not included in this summary. - Paget disease of the nipple is a condition in which abnormal cells are found in the nipple only. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed. Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB. - In stage IA, the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer has not spread outside the breast. - In stage IB, small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes and either: - no tumor is found in the breast; or - the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Stage II Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB. - In stage IIA: - no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller. Cancer (larger than 2 millimeters) is found in 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or in the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy); or - the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. - In stage IIB, the tumor is: - larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes; or - larger than 2 centimeters but not larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or to the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy); or - larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. Stage IIIA In stage IIIA: - no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor may be any size. Cancer is found in 4 to 9 axillary lymph nodes or in the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during imaging tests or a physical exam); or - the tumor is larger than 5 centimeters. Small clusters of breast cancer cells (larger than 0.2 millimeter but not larger than 2 millimeters) are found in the lymph nodes; or - the tumor is larger than 5 centimeters. Cancer has spread to 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes or to the lymph nodes near the breastbone (found during a sentinel lymph node biopsy). Stage IIIB In stage IIIB, the tumor may be any size and cancer has spread to the chest wall and/or to the skin of the breast and caused swelling or an ulcer. Also, cancer may have spread to: - up to 9 axillary lymph nodes; or - the lymph nodes near the breastbone. Cancer that has spread to the skin of the breast may also be inflammatory breast cancer. See the section on Inflammatory Breast Cancer for more information. Stage IIIC In stage IIIC, no tumor is found in the breast or the tumor may be any size. Cancer may have spread to the skin of the breast and caused swelling or an ulcer and/or has spread to the chest wall. Also, cancer has spread to: - 10 or more axillary lymph nodes; or - lymph nodes above or below the collarbone; or - axillary lymph nodes and lymph nodes near the breastbone. Cancer that has spread to the skin of the breast may also be inflammatory breast cancer. See the section on Inflammatory Breast Cancer for more information. Stage IV In stage IV, cancer has spread to other organs of the body, most often the bones, lungs, liver, or brain. The treatment of breast cancer depends partly on the stage of the disease. For ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) treatment options, see Ductal Carcinoma in Situ. For treatment options for stage I, stage II, stage IIIA, and operable stage IIIC breast cancer, see Early, Localized, or Operable Breast Cancer. For treatment options for stage IIIB, inoperable stage IIIC, and inflammatory breast cancer, see Locally Advanced or Inflammatory Breast Cancer. For treatment options for cancer that has recurred near the area where it first formed, see Locoregional Recurrent Breast Cancer. For treatment options for stage IV breast cancer or breast cancer that has recurred in other parts of the body, see Metastatic Breast Cancer.
What are the treatments for Breast Cancer ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with breast cancer. - Five types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Hormone therapy - Targeted therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant - Treatment for breast cancer may cause side effects. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with breast cancer. Different types of treatment are available for patients with breast cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Five types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Most patients with breast cancer have surgery to remove the cancer. Sentinel lymph node biopsy is the removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node where the cancer is likely to spread. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. After the sentinel lymph node biopsy, the surgeon removes the tumor using breast-conserving surgery or mastectomy. If cancer cells were not found in the sentinel lymph node, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. If cancer cells were found, more lymph nodes will be removed through a separate incision. This is called a lymph node dissection. Types of surgery include the following: - Breast-conserving surgery is an operation to remove the cancer and some normal tissue around it, but not the breast itself. Part of the chest wall lining may also be removed if the cancer is near it. This type of surgery may also be called lumpectomy, partial mastectomy, segmental mastectomy, quadrantectomy, or breast-sparing surgery. - Total mastectomy: Surgery to remove the whole breast that has cancer. This procedure is also called a simple mastectomy. Some of the lymph nodes under the arm may be removed and checked for cancer. This may be done at the same time as the breast surgery or after. This is done through a separate incision. - Modified radical mastectomy: Surgery to remove the whole breast that has cancer, many of the lymph nodes under the arm, the lining over the chest muscles, and sometimes, part of the chest wall muscles. Chemotherapy may be given before surgery to remove the tumor. When given before surgery, chemotherapy will shrink the tumor and reduce the amount of tissue that needs to be removed during surgery. Treatment given before surgery is called preoperative therapy or neoadjuvant therapy. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or hormone therapy after surgery, to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called postoperative therapy or adjuvant therapy. If a patient is going to have a mastectomy, breast reconstruction (surgery to rebuild a breasts shape after a mastectomy) may be considered. Breast reconstruction may be done at the time of the mastectomy or at some time after. The reconstructed breast may be made with the patients own (nonbreast) tissue or by using implants filled with saline or silicone gel. Before the decision to get an implant is made, patients can call the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Center for Devices and Radiologic Health at 1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332) or visit the FDA website for more information on breast implants. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat breast cancer. Internal radiation therapy with strontium-89 (a radionuclide) is used to relieve bone pain caused by breast cancer that has spread to the bones. Strontium-89 is injected into a vein and travels to the surface of the bones. Radiation is released and kills cancer cells in the bones. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Systemic chemotherapy is used in the treatment of breast cancer. See Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer for more information. Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a cancer treatment that removes hormones or blocks their action and stops cancer cells from growing. Hormones are substances made by glands in the body and circulated in the bloodstream. Some hormones can cause certain cancers to grow. If tests show that the cancer cells have places where hormones can attach (receptors), drugs, surgery, or radiation therapy is used to reduce the production of hormones or block them from working. The hormone estrogen, which makes some breast cancers grow, is made mainly by the ovaries. Treatment to stop the ovaries from making estrogen is called ovarian ablation. Hormone therapy with tamoxifen is often given to patients with early localized breast cancer that can be removed by surgery and those with metastatic breast cancer (cancer that has spread to other parts of the body). Hormone therapy with tamoxifen or estrogens can act on cells all over the body and may increase the chance of developing endometrial cancer. Women taking tamoxifen should have a pelvic exam every year to look for any signs of cancer. Any vaginal bleeding, other than menstrual bleeding, should be reported to a doctor as soon as possible. Hormone therapy with a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist is given to some premenopausal women who have just been diagnosed with hormone receptor positive breast cancer. LHRH agonists decrease the body's estrogen and progesterone. Hormone therapy with an aromatase inhibitor is given to some postmenopausal women who have hormone receptor positive breast cancer. Aromatase inhibitors decrease the body's estrogen by blocking an enzyme called aromatase from turning androgen into estrogen. Anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane are types of aromatase inhibitors. For the treatment of early localized breast cancer that can be removed by surgery, certain aromatase inhibitors may be used as adjuvant therapy instead of tamoxifen or after 2 to 3 years of tamoxifen use. For the treatment of metastatic breast cancer, aromatase inhibitors are being tested in clinical trials to compare them to hormone therapy with tamoxifen. Other types of hormone therapy include megestrol acetate or anti-estrogen therapy such as fulvestrant. See Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer for more information. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Monoclonal antibodies, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, and PARP inhibitors are types of targeted therapies used in the treatment of breast cancer. Monoclonal antibody therapy is a cancer treatment that uses antibodies made in the laboratory, from a single type of immune system cell. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. Monoclonal antibodies may be used in combination with chemotherapy as adjuvant therapy. Types of monoclonal antibody therapy include the following: - Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that blocks the effects of the growth factor protein HER2, which sends growth signals to breast cancer cells. It may be used with other therapies to treat HER2 positive breast cancer. - Pertuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that may be combined with trastuzumab and chemotherapy to treat breast cancer. It may be used to treat certain patients with HER2 positive breast cancer that has metastasized (spread to other parts of the body). It may also be used as neoadjuvant therapy in certain patients with early stage HER2 positive breast cancer. - Ado-trastuzumab emtansine is a monoclonal antibody linked to an anticancer drug. This is called an antibody-drug conjugate. It is used to treat HER2 positive breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body or recurred (come back). Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are targeted therapy drugs that block signals needed for tumors to grow. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors may be used with other anticancer drugs as adjuvant therapy. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors include the following: - Lapatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that blocks the effects of the HER2 protein and other proteins inside tumor cells. It may be used with other drugs to treat patients with HER2 positive breast cancer that has progressed after treatment with trastuzumab. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors are targeted therapy drugs that block proteins called cyclin-dependent kinases, which cause the growth of cancer cells. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors include the following: - Palbociclib is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor used with the drug letrozole to treat breast cancer that is estrogen receptor positive and HER2 negative and has spread to other parts of the body. It is used in postmenopausal women whose cancer has not been treated with hormone therapy. Palbociclib may also be used with fulvestrant in women whose disease has gotten worse after treatment with hormone therapy. - Ribociclib is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor used with letrozole to treat breast cancer that is hormone receptor positive and HER2 negative and has come back or spread to other parts of the body. It is used in postmenopausal women whose cancer has not been treated with hormone therapy. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors block a protein called mTOR, which may keep cancer cells from growing and prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. mTOR inhibitors include the following: - Everolimus is an mTOR inhibitor used in postmenopausal women with advanced hormone receptor positive breast cancer that is also HER2 negative and has not gotten better with other treatment. PARP inhibitors are a type of targeted therapy that block DNA repair and may cause cancer cells to die. PARP inhibitor therapy is being studied for the treatment of patients with triple negative breast cancer or tumors with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. See Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant is a way of giving high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen and stored. After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the bodys blood cells. Studies have shown that high-dose chemotherapy followed by stem cell transplant does not work better than standard chemotherapy in the treatment of breast cancer. Doctors have decided that, for now, high-dose chemotherapy should be tested only in clinical trials. Before taking part in such a trial, women should talk with their doctors about the serious side effects, including death, that may be caused by high-dose chemotherapy. Treatment for breast cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Some treatments for breast cancer may cause side effects that continue or appear months or years after treatment has ended. These are called late effects. Late effects of radiation therapy are not common, but may include: - Inflammation of the lung after radiation therapy to the breast, especially when chemotherapy is given at the same time. - Arm lymphedema, especially when radiation therapy is given after lymph node dissection. - In women younger than 45 years who receive radiation therapy to the chest wall after mastectomy, there may be a higher risk of developing breast cancer in the other breast. Late effects of chemotherapy depend on the drugs used, but may include: - Heart failure. - Blood clots. - Premature menopause. - Second cancer, such as leukemia. Late effects of targeted therapy with trastuzumab, lapatinib, or pertuzumab may include: - Heart problems such as heart failure. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Breast Cancer Early, Localized, or Operable Breast Cancer Treatment of early, localized, or operable breast cancer may include the following: Surgery - Breast-conserving surgery and sentinel lymph node biopsy. If cancer is found in the lymph nodes, a lymph node dissection may be done. - Modified radical mastectomy. Breast reconstruction surgery may also be done. Postoperative radiation therapy For women who had breast-conserving surgery, radiation therapy is given to the whole breast to lessen the chance the cancer will come back. Radiation therapy may also be given to lymph nodes in the area. For women who had a modified radical mastectomy, radiation therapy may be given to lessen the chance the cancer will come back if any of the following are true: - Cancer was found in 4 or more lymph nodes. - Cancer had spread to tissue around the lymph nodes. - The tumor was large. - There is tumor close to or remaining in the tissue near the edges of where the tumor was removed. Postoperative systemic therapy Systemic therapy is the use of drugs that can enter the bloodstream and reach cancer cells throughout the body. Postoperative systemic therapy is given to lessen the chance the cancer will come back after surgery to remove the tumor. Postoperative systemic therapy is given depending on whether: - The tumor is hormone receptor negative or positive. - The tumor is HER2-neu negative or positive. - The tumor is hormone receptor negative and HER2-neu negative (triple negative). - The size of the tumor. In premenopausal women with hormone receptor positive tumors, no more treatment may be needed or postoperative therapy may include: - Tamoxifen therapy with or without chemotherapy. - Tamoxifen therapy and treatment to stop or lessen how much estrogen is made by the ovaries. Drug therapy, surgery to remove the ovaries, or radiation therapy to the ovaries may be used. - Aromatase inhibitor therapy and treatment to stop or lessen how much estrogen is made by the ovaries. Drug therapy, surgery to remove the ovaries, or radiation therapy to the ovaries may be used. In postmenopausal women with hormone receptor positive tumors, no more treatment may be needed or postoperative therapy may include: - Aromatase inhibitor therapy with or without chemotherapy. - Tamoxifen followed by aromatase inhibitor therapy, with or without chemotherapy. In women with hormone receptor negative tumors, no more treatment may be needed or postoperative therapy may include: - Chemotherapy. In women with HER2-neu negative tumors, postoperative therapy may include: - Chemotherapy. In women with small, HER2-neu positive tumors, and no cancer in the lymph nodes, no more treatment may be needed. If there is cancer in the lymph nodes, or the tumor is large, postoperative therapy may include: - Chemotherapy and targeted therapy (trastuzumab). - Hormone therapy, such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor therapy, for tumors that are also hormone receptor positive. In women with small, hormone receptor negative and HER2-neu negative tumors (triple negative) and no cancer in the lymph nodes, no more treatment may be needed. If there is cancer in the lymph nodes or the tumor is large, postoperative therapy may include: - Chemotherapy. - Radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of a new chemotherapy regimen. - A clinical trial of PARP inhibitor therapy. Preoperative systemic therapy Systemic therapy is the use of drugs that can enter the bloodstream and reach cancer cells throughout the body. Preoperative systemic therapy is given to shrink the tumor before surgery. In postmenopausal women with hormone receptor positive tumors, preoperative therapy may include: - Chemotherapy. - Hormone therapy, such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor therapy, for women who cannot have chemotherapy. In premenopausal women with hormone receptor positive tumors, preoperative therapy may include: - A clinical trial of hormone therapy, such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor therapy. In women with HER2-neu positive tumors, preoperative therapy may include: - Chemotherapy and targeted therapy (trastuzumab). - Targeted therapy (pertuzumab). In women with HER2-neu negative tumors or triple negative tumors, preoperative therapy may include: - Chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I breast cancer, stage II breast cancer, stage IIIA breast cancer and stage IIIC breast cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Locally Advanced or Inflammatory Breast Cancer Treatment of locally advanced or inflammatory breast cancer is a combination of therapies that may include the following: - Surgery (breast-conserving surgery or total mastectomy) with lymph node dissection. - Chemotherapy before and/or after surgery. - Radiation therapy after surgery. - Hormone therapy after surgery for tumors that are estrogen receptor positive or estrogen receptor unknown. - Clinical trials testing new anticancer drugs, new drug combinations, and new ways of giving treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IIIB breast cancer, stage IIIC breast cancer, stage IV breast cancer and inflammatory breast cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Locoregional Recurrent Breast Cancer Treatment of locoregional recurrent breast cancer (cancer that has come back after treatment in the breast, in the chest wall, or in nearby lymph nodes), may include the following: - Chemotherapy. - Hormone therapy for tumors that are hormone receptor positive. - Radiation therapy. - Surgery. - Targeted therapy (trastuzumab). - A clinical trial of a new treatment. See the Metastatic Breast Cancer section for information about treatment options for breast cancer that has spread to parts of the body outside the breast, chest wall, or nearby lymph nodes. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent breast cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Metastatic Breast Cancer Treatment options for metastatic breast cancer (cancer that has spread to distant parts of the body) may include the following: Hormone therapy In postmenopausal women who have just been diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer that is hormone receptor positive or if the hormone receptor status is not known, treatment may include: - Tamoxifen therapy. - Aromatase inhibitor therapy (anastrozole, letrozole, or exemestane). Sometimes cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor therapy (palbociclib) is also given. In premenopausal women who have just been diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer that is hormone receptor positive, treatment may include: - Tamoxifen, an LHRH agonist, or both. In women whose tumors are hormone receptor positive or hormone receptor unknown, with spread to the bone or soft tissue only, and who have been treated with tamoxifen, treatment may include: - Aromatase inhibitor therapy. - Other hormone therapy such as megestrol acetate, estrogen or androgen therapy, or anti-estrogen therapy such as fulvestrant. Targeted therapy In women with metastatic breast cancer that is hormone receptor positive and has not responded to other treatments, options may include targeted therapy such as: - Trastuzumab, lapatinib, pertuzumab, or mTOR inhibitors. - Antibody-drug conjugate therapy with ado-trastuzumab emtansine. - Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor therapy (palbociclib) combined with letrozole. In women with metastatic breast cancer that is HER2-neu positive, treatment may include: - Targeted therapy such as trastuzumab, pertuzumab, ado-trastuzumab emtansine, or lapatinib. Chemotherapy In women with metastatic breast cancer that is hormone receptor negative, has not responded to hormone therapy, has spread to other organs or has caused symptoms, treatment may include: - Chemotherapy with one or more drugs. Surgery - Total mastectomy for women with open or painful breast lesions. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - Surgery to remove cancer that has spread to the brain or spine. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - Surgery to remove cancer that has spread to the lung. - Surgery to repair or help support weak or broken bones. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - Surgery to remove fluid that has collected around the lungs or heart. Radiation therapy - Radiation therapy to the bones, brain, spinal cord, breast, or chest wall to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. - Strontium-89 (a radionuclide) to relieve pain from cancer that has spread to bones throughout the body. Other treatment options Other treatment options for metastatic breast cancer include: - Drug therapy with bisphosphonates or denosumab to reduce bone disease and pain when cancer has spread to the bone. (See the PDQ summary on Cancer Pain for more information about bisphosphonates.) - A clinical trial of high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant. - Clinical trials testing new anticancer drugs, new drug combinations, and new ways of giving treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with metastatic cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Breast Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant is a way of giving high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen and stored. After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the bodys blood cells. Studies have shown that high-dose chemotherapy followed by stem cell transplant does not work better than standard chemotherapy in the treatment of breast cancer. Doctors have decided that, for now, high-dose chemotherapy should be tested only in clinical trials. Before taking part in such a trial, women should talk with their doctors about the serious side effects, including death, that may be caused by high-dose chemotherapy. Treatment for breast cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Some treatments for breast cancer may cause side effects that continue or appear months or years after treatment has ended. These are called late effects. Late effects of radiation therapy are not common, but may include: - Inflammation of the lung after radiation therapy to the breast, especially when chemotherapy is given at the same time. - Arm lymphedema, especially when radiation therapy is given after lymph node dissection. - In women younger than 45 years who receive radiation therapy to the chest wall after mastectomy, there may be a higher risk of developing breast cancer in the other breast. Late effects of chemotherapy depend on the drugs used, but may include: - Heart failure. - Blood clots. - Premature menopause. - Second cancer, such as leukemia. Late effects of targeted therapy with trastuzumab, lapatinib, or pertuzumab may include: - Heart problems such as heart failure. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
How breast cancer starts?
Breast cancer occurs almost entirely in women, but men can get breast cancer, too. Breast cancer is cancer that's found in the breasts. It's the most common type of cancer in women in the UK. Anyone can get breast cancer. Cancer starts when cells begin to grow out of control. Its important to understand that most breast lumps are benign and not cancer (malignant). Non-cancer breast tumors are abnormal growths, but they do not spread outside of the breast. They are not life threatening, but some types of benign breast lumps can increase a woman's risk of getting breast cancer.
Any breast lump or change needs to be checked by a health care professional to find out if it is benign or malignant (cancer) and if it might affect your future cancer risk. See Non-cancerous Breast Conditions to learn more.
Which are the main symptoms of breast cancer in women? 
Symptoms of breast cancer in women may include: a lump, or swelling in your breast, chest or armpit; a change in the skin of your breast, such as dimpling (may look like orange peel) or redness (may be harder to see on black or brown skin); a change in size or shape of 1 or both breasts; nipple discharge (if you are not pregnant or breastfeeding), which may have blood in it; a change in the shape or look of your nipple, such as it turning inwards (inverted nipple) or a rash on it (may look like eczema); pain in your breast or armpit which does not go away  breast pain that comes and goes is usually not a symptom of breast cancer
What is are Skin Cancer ?
  - Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. - There are different types of cancer that start in the skin. - Skin color and being exposed to sunlight can increase the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. - Nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis often appear as a change in the skin. - Tests or procedures that examine the skin are used to detect (find) and diagnose nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. The skin is the bodys largest organ. It protects against heat, sunlight, injury, and infection. Skin also helps control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D. The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (upper or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells: - Squamous cells: Thin, flat cells that form the top layer of the epidermis. - Basal cells: Round cells under the squamous cells. - Melanocytes: Cells that make melanin and are found in the lower part of the epidermis. Melanin is the pigment that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun, melanocytes make more pigment and cause the skin to darken. Skin cancer can occur anywhere on the body, but it is most common in skin that is often exposed to sunlight, such as the face, neck, hands, and arms. There are different types of cancer that start in the skin. The most common types are basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, which are nonmelanoma skin cancers. Nonmelanoma skin cancers rarely spread to other parts of the body. Melanoma is a much rarer type of skin cancer. It is more likely to invade nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body. Actinic keratosis is a skin condition that sometimes becomes squamous cell carcinoma. This summary is about nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. See the following PDQ summaries for information on melanoma and other kinds of cancer that affect the skin: - Melanoma Treatment - Mycosis Fungoides and the Szary Syndrome Treatment - Kaposi Sarcoma Treatment - Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment - Unusual Cancers of Childhood Treatment - Genetics of Skin Cancer Nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis often appear as a change in the skin. Not all changes in the skin are a sign of nonmelanoma skin cancer or actinic keratosis. Check with your doctor if you notice any changes in your skin. Signs of nonmelanoma skin cancer include the following: - A sore that does not heal. - Areas of the skin that are: - Raised, smooth, shiny, and look pearly. - Firm and look like a scar, and may be white, yellow, or waxy. - Raised, and red or reddish-brown. - Scaly, bleeding or crusty.
Who is at risk for Skin Cancer? ?
Skin color and being exposed to sunlight can increase the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma include the following: - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Having actinic keratosis. - Past treatment with radiation. - Having a weakened immune system. - Having certain changes in the genes that are linked to skin cancer. - Being exposed to arsenic.
How to diagnose Skin Cancer ?
Tests or procedures that examine the skin are used to detect (find) and diagnose nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. The following procedures may be used: - Skin exam: A doctor or nurse checks the skin for bumps or spots that look abnormal in color, size, shape, or texture. - Skin biopsy : All or part of the abnormal-looking growth is cut from the skin and viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. There are four main types of skin biopsies: - Shave biopsy : A sterile razor blade is used to shave-off the abnormal-looking growth. - Punch biopsy : A special instrument called a punch or a trephine is used to remove a circle of tissue from the abnormal-looking growth. - Incisional biopsy : A scalpel is used to remove part of a growth. - Excisional biopsy : A scalpel is used to remove the entire growth.
What is the outlook for Skin Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) depends mostly on the stage of the cancer and the type of treatment used to remove the cancer. Treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (whether it has spread deeper into the skin or to other places in the body). - The type of cancer. - The size of the tumor and what part of the body it affects. - The patients general health.
What are the stages of Skin Cancer ?
  - After nonmelanoma skin cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the skin or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - Staging of nonmelanoma skin cancer depends on whether the tumor has certain "high-risk" features and if the tumor is on the eyelid. - The following stages are used for nonmelanoma skin cancer that is not on the eyelid: - Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) - Stage I Stage I nonmelanoma skin cancer. The tumor is no more than 2 centimeters. - Stage II Stage II nonmelanoma skin cancer. The tumor is more than 2 centimeters wide. - Stage III - Stage IV - The following stages are used for nonmelanoma skin cancer on the eyelid: - Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV - Treatment is based on the type of nonmelanoma skin cancer or other skin condition diagnosed: - Basal cell carcinoma - Squamous cell carcinoma - Actinic keratosis After nonmelanoma skin cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the skin or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the skin or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Lymph node biopsy : For squamous cell carcinoma, the lymph nodes may be removed and checked to see if cancer has spread to them. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if skin cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually skin cancer cells. The disease is metastatic skin cancer, not lung cancer. Staging of nonmelanoma skin cancer depends on whether the tumor has certain "high-risk" features and if the tumor is on the eyelid. Staging for nonmelanoma skin cancer that is on the eyelid is different from staging for nonmelanoma skin cancer that affects other parts of the body. The following are high-risk features for nonmelanoma skin cancer that is not on the eyelid: - The tumor is thicker than 2 millimeters. - The tumor is described as Clark level IV (has spread into the lower layer of the dermis) or Clark level V (has spread into the layer of fat below the skin). - The tumor has grown and spread along nerve pathways. - The tumor began on an ear or on a lip that has hair on it. - The tumor has cells that look very different from normal cells under a microscope. The following stages are used for nonmelanoma skin cancer that is not on the eyelid: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the squamous cell or basal cell layer of the epidermis (topmost layer of the skin). These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed. The tumor is not larger than 2 centimeters at its widest point and may have one high-risk feature. Stage II In stage II, the tumor is either: - larger than 2 centimeters at its widest point; or - any size and has two or more high-risk features. Stage III In stage III: - The tumor has spread to the jaw, eye socket, or side of the skull. Cancer may have spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor. The lymph node is not larger than 3 centimeters. or - Cancer has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor. The lymph node is not larger than 3 centimeters and one of the following is true: - the tumor is not larger than 2 centimeters at its widest point and may have one high-risk feature; or - the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters at its widest point; or - the tumor is any size and has two or more high-risk features. Stage IV In stage IV, one of the following is true: - The tumor is any size and may have spread to the jaw, eye socket, or side of the skull. Cancer has spread to one lymph node on the same side of the body as the tumor and the affected node is larger than 3 centimeters but not larger than 6 centimeters, or cancer has spread to more than one lymph node on one or both sides of the body and the affected nodes are not larger than 6 centimeters; or - The tumor is any size and may have spread to the jaw, eye socket, skull, spine, or ribs. Cancer has spread to one lymph node that is larger than 6 centimeters; or - The tumor is any size and has spread to the base of the skull, spine, or ribs. Cancer may have spread to the lymph nodes; or - Cancer has spread to other parts of the body, such as the lung. The following stages are used for nonmelanoma skin cancer on the eyelid: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the epidermis (topmost layer of the skin). These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. Stage I Stage I is divided into stages IA, IB, and IC. - Stage IA: The tumor is 5 millimeters or smaller and has not spread to the connective tissue of the eyelid or to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are. - Stage IB: The tumor is larger than 5 millimeters but not larger than 10 millimeters or has spread to the connective tissue of the eyelid, or to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are. - Stage IC: The tumor is larger than 10 millimeters but not larger than 20 millimeters or has spread through the full thickness of the eyelid. Stage II In stage II, one of the following is true: - The tumor is larger than 20 millimeters. - The tumor has spread to nearby parts of the eye or eye socket. - The tumor has spread to spaces around the nerves in the eyelid. Stage III Stage III is divided into stages IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC. - Stage IIIA: To remove all of the tumor, the whole eye and part of the optic nerve must be removed. The bone, muscles, fat, and connective tissue around the eye may also be removed. - Stage IIIB: The tumor may be anywhere in or near the eye and has spread to nearby lymph nodes. - Stage IIIC: The tumor has spread to structures around the eye or in the face, or to the brain, and cannot be removed in surgery. Stage IV The tumor has spread to distant parts of the body. Treatment is based on the type of nonmelanoma skin cancer or other skin condition diagnosed: Basal cell carcinoma Basal cell carcinoma is the most common type of skin cancer. It usually occurs on areas of the skin that have been in the sun, most often the nose. Often this cancer appears as a raised bump that looks smooth and pearly. Another type looks like a scar and is flat and firm and may be white, yellow, or waxy. Basal cell carcinoma may spread to tissues around the cancer, but it usually does not spread to other parts of the body. Squamous cell carcinoma Squamous cell carcinoma occurs on areas of the skin that have been in the sun, such as the ears, lower lip, and the back of the hands. Squamous cell carcinoma may also appear on areas of the skin that have been burned or exposed to chemicals or radiation. Often this cancer appears as a firm red bump. The tumor may feel scaly, bleed, or form a crust. Squamous cell tumors may spread to nearby lymph nodes. Squamous cell carcinoma that has not spread can usually be cured. Actinic keratosis Actinic keratosis is a skin condition that is not cancer, but sometimes changes into squamous cell carcinoma. It usually occurs in areas that have been exposed to the sun, such as the face, the back of the hands, and the lower lip. It looks like rough, red, pink, or brown scaly patches on the skin that may be flat or raised, or the lower lip cracks and peels and is not helped by lip balm or petroleum jelly.
What are the treatments for Skin Cancer ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. - Six types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Photodynamic therapy - Biologic therapy - Targeted therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Treatment for skin cancer may cause side effects. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. Different types of treatment are available for patients with nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Six types of standard treatment are used: Surgery One or more of the following surgical procedures may be used to treat nonmelanoma skin cancer or actinic keratosis: - Mohs micrographic surgery: The tumor is cut from the skin in thin layers. During surgery, the edges of the tumor and each layer of tumor removed are viewed through a microscope to check for cancer cells. Layers continue to be removed until no more cancer cells are seen. This type of surgery removes as little normal tissue as possible and is often used to remove skin cancer on the face. - Simple excision: The tumor is cut from the skin along with some of the normal skin around it. - Shave excision: The abnormal area is shaved off the surface of the skin with a small blade. - Electrodesiccation and curettage: The tumor is cut from the skin with a curette (a sharp, spoon-shaped tool). A needle-shaped electrode is then used to treat the area with an electric current that stops the bleeding and destroys cancer cells that remain around the edge of the wound. The process may be repeated one to three times during the surgery to remove all of the cancer. - Cryosurgery: A treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue, such as carcinoma in situ. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy. - Laser surgery: A surgical procedure that uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) as a knife to make bloodless cuts in tissue or to remove a surface lesion such as a tumor. - Dermabrasion: Removal of the top layer of skin using a rotating wheel or small particles to rub away skin cells. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat skin cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Chemotherapy for nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis is usually topical (applied to the skin in a cream or lotion). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the condition being treated. Retinoids (drugs related to vitamin A) are sometimes used to treat squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. See Drugs Approved for Basal Cell Carcinoma for more information. Photodynamic therapy Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a cancer treatment that uses a drug and a certain type of laser light to kill cancer cells. A drug that is not active until it is exposed to light is injected into a vein. The drug collects more in cancer cells than in normal cells. For skin cancer, laser light is shined onto the skin and the drug becomes active and kills the cancer cells. Photodynamic therapy causes little damage to healthy tissue. Biologic therapy Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patients immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the bodys natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or immunotherapy. Interferon and imiquimod are biologic agents used to treat skin cancer. Interferon (by injection) may be used to treat squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Topical imiquimod therapy (a cream applied to the skin) may be used to treat some small basal cell carcinomas. See Drugs Approved for Basal Cell Carcinoma for more information. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to attack cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. Targeted therapy with a signal transduction inhibitor is used to treat basal cell carcinoma. Signal transduction inhibitors block signals that are passed from one molecule to another inside a cell. Blocking these signals may kill cancer cells. Vismodegib and sonidegib are signal transduction inhibitors used to treat basal cell carcinoma. See Drugs Approved for Basal Cell Carcinoma for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Treatment for skin cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are likely to recur (come back), usually within 5 years, or new tumors may form. Talk to your doctor about how often you should have your skin checked for signs of cancer. Treatment Options for Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer Basal Cell Carcinoma Treatment of basal cell carcinoma may include the following: - Simple excision. - Mohs micrographic surgery. - Radiation therapy. - Electrodesiccation and curettage. - Cryosurgery. - Photodynamic therapy. - Topical chemotherapy. - Topical biologic therapy with imiquimod. - Laser surgery. Treatment of recurrent basal cell carcinoma is usually Mohs micrographic surgery. Treatment of basal cell carcinoma that is metastatic or cannot be treated with local therapy may include the following: - Targeted therapy with a signal transduction inhibitor. - Chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with basal cell carcinoma of the skin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Squamous Cell Carcinoma Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma may include the following: - Simple excision. - Mohs micrographic surgery. - Radiation therapy. - Electrodesiccation and curettage. - Cryosurgery. Treatment of recurrent squamous cell carcinoma may include the following: - Simple excision. - Mohs micrographic surgery. - Radiation therapy. Treatment of squamous cell carcinoma that is metastatic or cannot be treated with local therapy may include the following: - Chemotherapy. - Retinoid therapy and biologic therapy with interferon. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Skin Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Treatment for skin cancer may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
  - Melanoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in melanocytes (cells that color the skin). - There are different types of cancer that start in the skin. - Melanoma can occur anywhere on the skin. - Unusual moles, exposure to sunlight, and health history can affect the risk of melanoma. - Signs of melanoma include a change in the way a mole or pigmented area looks. - Tests that examine the skin are used to detect (find) and diagnose melanoma. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Melanoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in melanocytes (cells that color the skin). The skin is the bodys largest organ. It protects against heat, sunlight, injury, and infection. Skin also helps control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D. The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (upper or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells: - Squamous cells: Thin, flat cells that form the top layer of the epidermis. - Basal cells: Round cells under the squamous cells. - Melanocytes: Cells that make melanin and are found in the lower part of the epidermis. Melanin is the pigment that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun or artificial light, melanocytes make more pigment and cause the skin to darken. The number of new cases of melanoma has been increasing over the last 40 years. Melanoma is most common in adults, but it is sometimes found in children and adolescents. (See the PDQ summary on Unusual Cancers of Childhood Treatment for more information on melanoma in children and adolescents.) There are different types of cancer that start in the skin. There are two forms of skin cancer: melanoma and nonmelanoma. Melanoma is a rare form of skin cancer. It is more likely to invade nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body than other types of skin cancer. When melanoma starts in the skin, it is called cutaneous melanoma. Melanoma may also occur in mucous membranes (thin, moist layers of tissue that cover surfaces such as the lips). This PDQ summary is about cutaneous (skin) melanoma and melanoma that affects the mucous membranes. The most common types of skin cancer are basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. They are nonmelanoma skin cancers. Nonmelanoma skin cancers rarely spread to other parts of the body. (See the PDQ summary on Skin Cancer Treatment for more information on basal cell and squamous cell skin cancer.) Melanoma can occur anywhere on the skin. In men, melanoma is often found on the trunk (the area from the shoulders to the hips) or the head and neck. In women, melanoma forms most often on the arms and legs. When melanoma occurs in the eye, it is called intraocular or ocular melanoma. (See the PDQ summary on Intraocular (Uveal) Melanoma Treatment for more information.)
Who is at risk for Melanoma? ?
Unusual moles, exposure to sunlight, and health history can affect the risk of melanoma. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for melanoma include the following: - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Being exposed to certain factors in the environment (in the air, your home or workplace, and your food and water). Some of the environmental risk factors for melanoma are radiation, solvents, vinyl chloride, and PCBs. - Having a history of many blistering sunburns, especially as a child or teenager. - Having several large or many small moles. - Having a family history of unusual moles (atypical nevus syndrome). - Having a family or personal history of melanoma. - Being white. - Having a weakened immune system. - Having certain changes in the genes that are linked to melanoma. Being white or having a fair complexion increases the risk of melanoma, but anyone can have melanoma, including people with dark skin. See the following PDQ summaries for more information on risk factors for melanoma: - Genetics of Skin Cancer - Skin Cancer Prevention
What are the symptoms of Melanoma ?
Signs of melanoma include a change in the way a mole or pigmented area looks. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by melanoma or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - A mole that: - changes in size, shape, or color. - has irregular edges or borders. - is more than one color. - is asymmetrical (if the mole is divided in half, the 2 halves are different in size or shape). - itches. - oozes, bleeds, or is ulcerated (a hole forms in the skin when the top layer of cells breaks down and the tissue below shows through). - A change in pigmented (colored) skin. - Satellite moles (new moles that grow near an existing mole). For pictures and descriptions of common moles and melanoma, see Common Moles, Dysplastic Nevi, and Risk of Melanoma.
How to diagnose Melanoma ?
Tests that examine the skin are used to detect (find) and diagnose melanoma. If a mole or pigmented area of the skin changes or looks abnormal, the following tests and procedures can help find and diagnose melanoma: - Skin exam: A doctor or nurse checks the skin for moles, birthmarks, or other pigmented areas that look abnormal in color, size, shape, or texture. - Biopsy : A procedure to remove the abnormal tissue and a small amount of normal tissue around it. A pathologist looks at the tissue under a microscope to check for cancer cells. It can be hard to tell the difference between a colored mole and an early melanoma lesion. Patients may want to have the sample of tissue checked by a second pathologist. If the abnormal mole or lesion is cancer, the sample of tissue may also be tested for certain gene changes. It is important that abnormal areas of the skin not be shaved off or cauterized (destroyed with a hot instrument, an electric current, or a caustic substance) because cancer cells that remain may grow and spread. See the PDQ summary on Skin Cancer Screening for more information.
What is the outlook for Melanoma ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The thickness of the tumor and where it is in the body. - How quickly the cancer cells are dividing. - Whether there was bleeding or ulceration of the tumor. - How much cancer is in the lymph nodes. - The number of places cancer has spread to in the body. - The level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in the blood. - Whether the cancer has certain mutations (changes) in a gene called BRAF. - The patients age and general health.
What are the stages of Melanoma ?
  - After melanoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the skin or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The method used to stage melanoma is based mainly on the thickness of the tumor and whether cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for melanoma: - Stage 0 (Melanoma in Situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV After melanoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the skin or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out whether cancer has spread within the skin or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Lymph node mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy : Procedures in which a radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through lymph ducts to the sentinel node or nodes (the first lymph node or nodes where cancer cells are likely to spread). The surgeon removes only the nodes with the radioactive substance or dye. A pathologist views a sample of tissue under a microscope to check for cancer cells. If no cancer cells are found, it may not be necessary to remove more nodes. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. For melanoma, pictures may be taken of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) with gadolinium : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the brain. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. For melanoma, the blood is checked for an enzyme called lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). LDH levels that are higher than normal may be a sign of melanoma. The results of these tests are viewed together with the results of the tumor biopsy to find out the stage of the melanoma. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if melanoma spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually melanoma cells. The disease is metastatic melanoma, not lung cancer. The method used to stage melanoma is based mainly on the thickness of the tumor and whether cancer has spread to lymph nodes or other parts of the body. The staging of melanoma depends on the following: - The thickness of the tumor. The thickness is described using the Breslow scale. - Whether the tumor is ulcerated (has broken through the skin). - Whether the tumor has spread to the lymph nodes and if the lymph nodes are joined together (matted). - Whether the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. The following stages are used for melanoma: Stage 0 (Melanoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal melanocytes are found in the epidermis. These abnormal melanocytes may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called melanoma in situ. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed. Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB. - Stage IA: In stage IA, the tumor is not more than 1 millimeter thick, with no ulceration. - Stage IB: In stage IB, the tumor is either: - not more than 1 millimeter thick and it has ulceration; or - more than 1 but not more than 2 millimeters thick, with no ulceration. Stage II Stage II is divided into stages IIA, IIB, and IIC. - Stage IIA: In stage IIA, the tumor is either: - more than 1 but not more than 2 millimeters thick, with ulceration; or - more than 2 but not more than 4 millimeters thick, with no ulceration. - Stage IIB: In stage IIB, the tumor is either: - more than 2 but not more than 4 millimeters thick, with ulceration; or - more than 4 millimeters thick, with no ulceration. - Stage IIC: In stage IIC, the tumor is more than 4 millimeters thick, with ulceration. Stage III In stage III, the tumor may be any thickness, with or without ulceration. One or more of the following is true: - Cancer has spread to one or more lymph nodes. - Lymph nodes are joined together (matted). - Cancer is in a lymph vessel between the primary tumor and nearby lymph nodes. The cancer is more than 2 centimeters away from the primary tumor. - Very small tumors are found on or under the skin, not more than 2 centimeters away from the primary tumor. Stage IV In stage IV, the cancer has spread to other places in the body, such as the lung, liver, brain, bone, soft tissue, or gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Cancer may have spread to places in the skin far away from where it first started.
What are the treatments for Melanoma ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with melanoma. - Five types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Chemotherapy - Radiation therapy - Immunotherapy - Targeted therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Treatment for melanoma may cause side effects. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with melanoma. Different types of treatment are available for patients with melanoma. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Five types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery to remove the tumor is the primary treatment of all stages of melanoma. A wide local excision is used to remove the melanoma and some of the normal tissue around it. Skin grafting (taking skin from another part of the body to replace the skin that is removed) may be done to cover the wound caused by surgery. It is important to know whether cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. Lymph node mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy are done to check for cancer in the sentinel lymph node (the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor) during surgery. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are found, more lymph nodes will be removed and tissue samples will be checked for signs of cancer. This is called a lymphadenectomy. Even if the doctor removes all the melanoma that can be seen at the time of surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Chemotherapy given after surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Surgery to remove cancer that has spread to the lymph nodes, lung, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, bone, or brain may be done to improve the patients quality of life by controlling symptoms. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). One type of regional chemotherapy is hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion. With this method, anticancer drugs go directly to the arm or leg the cancer is in. The flow of blood to and from the limb is temporarily stopped with a tourniquet. A warm solution with the anticancer drug is put directly into the blood of the limb. This gives a high dose of drugs to the area where the cancer is. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. See Drugs Approved for Melanoma for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat melanoma, and may also be used as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patients immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the bodys natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or biologic therapy. The following types of immunotherapy are being used in the treatment of melanoma: - Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: Some types of immune cells, such as T cells, and some cancer cells have certain proteins, called checkpoint proteins, on their surface that keep immune responses in check. When cancer cells have large amounts of these proteins, they will not be attacked and killed by T cells. Immune checkpoint inhibitors block these proteins and the ability of T cells to kill cancer cells is increased. They are used to treat some patients with advanced melanoma or tumors that cannot be removed by surgery. There are two types of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: - CTLA-4 inhibitor: CTL4-A is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the bodys immune responses in check. When CTLA-4 attaches to another protein called B7 on a cancer cell, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. CTLA-4 inhibitors attach to CTLA-4 and allow the T cells to kill cancer cells. Ipilimumab is a type of CTLA-4 inhibitor. - PD-1 inhibitor: PD-1 is a protein on the surface of T cells that helps keep the bodys immune responses in check. When PD-1 attaches to another protein called PDL-1 on a cancer cell, it stops the T cell from killing the cancer cell. PD-1 inhibitors attach to PDL-1 and allow the T cells to kill cancer cells. Pembrolizumab and nivolumab are types of PD-1 inhibitors. - Interferon: Interferon affects the division of cancer cells and can slow tumor growth. - Interleukin-2 (IL-2): IL-2 boosts the growth and activity of many immune cells, especially lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). Lymphocytes can attack and kill cancer cells. - Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy: TNF is a protein made by white blood cells in response to an antigen or infection. TNF is made in the laboratory and used as a treatment to kill cancer cells. It is being studied in the treatment of melanoma. See Drugs Approved for Melanoma for more information. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to attack cancer cells. Targeted therapies usually cause less harm to normal cells than chemotherapy or radiation therapy do. The following types of targeted therapy are used or being studied in the treatment of melanoma: - Signal transduction inhibitor therapy: Signal transduction inhibitors block signals that are passed from one molecule to another inside a cell. Blocking these signals may kill cancer cells. - Vemurafenib, dabrafenib, trametinib, and cobimetinib are signal transduction inhibitors used to treat some patients with advanced melanoma or tumors that cannot be removed by surgery. Vemurafenib and dabrafenib block the activity of proteins made by mutant BRAF genes. Trametinib and cobimetinib affect the growth and survival of cancer cells. - Oncolytic virus therapy: A type of targeted therapy that is used in the treatment of melanoma. Oncolytic virus therapy uses a virus that infects and breaks down cancer cells but not normal cells. Radiation therapy or chemotherapy may be given after oncolytic virus therapy to kill more cancer cells. - Angiogenesis inhibitors: A type of targeted therapy that is being studied in the treatment of melanoma. Angiogenesis inhibitors block the growth of new blood vessels. In cancer treatment, they may be given to prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. New targeted therapies and combinations of therapies are being studied in the treatment of melanoma. See Drugs Approved for Melanoma for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website Treatment for melanoma may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options by Stage Stage 0 (Melanoma in Situ) Treatment of stage 0 is usually surgery to remove the area of abnormal cells and a small amount of normal tissue around it. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage 0 melanoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage I Melanoma Treatment of stage I melanoma may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor and some of the normal tissue around it. Sometimes lymph node mapping and removal of lymph nodes is also done. - A clinical trial of new ways to find cancer cells in the lymph nodes. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I melanoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage II Melanoma Treatment of stage II melanoma may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor and some of the normal tissue around it. Sometimes lymph node mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy are done to check for cancer in the lymph nodes at the same time as the surgery to remove the tumor. If cancer is found in the sentinel lymph node, more lymph nodes may be removed. - Surgery followed by immunotherapy with interferon if there is a high risk that the cancer will come back. - A clinical trial of new types of treatment to be used after surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II melanoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Melanoma That Can Be Removed By Surgery Treatment of stage III melanoma that can be removed by surgery may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor and some of the normal tissue around it. Skin grafting may be done to cover the wound caused by surgery. Sometimes lymph node mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy are done to check for cancer in the lymph nodes at the same time as the surgery to remove the tumor. If cancer is found in the sentinel lymph node, more lymph nodes may be removed. - Surgery followed by immunotherapy with ipilimumab or interferon if there is a high risk that the cancer will come back. - A clinical trial of immunotherapy or targeted therapy to be used after surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III melanoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Melanoma That Cannot Be Removed By Surgery, Stage IV Melanoma, and Recurrent Melanoma Treatment of stage III melanoma that cannot be removed by surgery, stage IV melanoma, and recurrent melanoma may include the following: - Immunotherapy with ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, nivolumab, or interleukin-2 (IL-2). Sometimes ipilimumab and nivolumab are given together. - Targeted therapy with vemurafenib, dabrafenib, trametinib, or cobimetinib. Sometimes vemurafenib and cobimetinib or dabrafenib and trametinib are given together. - Injections into the tumor, such as oncolytic virus therapy. - Chemotherapy. - Palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. This may include: - Surgery to remove lymph nodes or tumors in the lung, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, bone, or brain. - Radiation therapy to the brain, spinal cord, or bone. Treatments that are being studied in clinical trials for stage III melanoma that cannot be removed by surgery, stage IV melanoma, and recurrent melanoma include the following: - Immunotherapy alone or in combination with other therapies such as targeted therapy. - Targeted therapy, such as signal transduction inhibitors, angiogenesis inhibitors, oncolytic virus therapy, or drugs that target certain gene mutations. These may be given alone or in combination. - Surgery to remove all known cancer. - Regional chemotherapy (hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion). Some patients may also have immunotherapy with tumor necrosis factor. - Systemic chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV melanoma and recurrent melanoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Melanoma ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website Treatment for melanoma may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups.
  - Merkel cell carcinoma is a very rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the skin. - Sun exposure and having a weak immune system can affect the risk of Merkel cell carcinoma. - Merkel cell carcinoma usually appears as a single painless lump on sun-exposed skin. - Tests and procedures that examine the skin are used to detect (find) and diagnose Merkel cell carcinoma. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Merkel cell carcinoma is a very rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the skin. Merkel cells are found in the top layer of the skin. These cells are very close to the nerve endings that receive the sensation of touch. Merkel cell carcinoma, also called neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin or trabecular cancer, is a very rare type of skin cancer that forms when Merkel cells grow out of control. Merkel cell carcinoma starts most often in areas of skin exposed to the sun, especially the head and neck, as well as the arms, legs, and trunk. Merkel cell carcinoma tends to grow quickly and to metastasize (spread) at an early stage. It usually spreads first to nearby lymph nodes and then may spread to lymph nodes or skin in distant parts of the body, lungs, brain, bones, or other organs.
Who is at risk for Merkel Cell Carcinoma? ?
un exposure and having a weak immune system can affect the risk of Merkel cell carcinoma. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for Merkel cell carcinoma include the following: - Being exposed to a lot of natural sunlight. - Being exposed to artificial sunlight, such as from tanning beds or psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy for psoriasis. - Having an immune system weakened by disease, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia or HIV infection. - Taking drugs that make the immune system less active, such as after an organ transplant. - Having a history of other types of cancer. - Being older than 50 years, male, or white.
What are the symptoms of Merkel Cell Carcinoma ?
Merkel cell carcinoma usually appears as a single painless lump on sun-exposed skin. This and other changes in the skin may be caused by Merkel cell carcinoma or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you see changes in your skin. Merkel cell carcinoma usually appears on sun-exposed skin as a single lump that is: - Fast-growing. - Painless. - Firm and dome-shaped or raised. - Red or violet in color.
How to diagnose Merkel Cell Carcinoma ?
Tests and procedures that examine the skin are used to detect (find) and diagnose Merkel cell carcinoma. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Full-body skin exam: A doctor or nurse checks the skin for bumps or spots that look abnormal in color, size, shape, or texture. The size, shape, and texture of the lymph nodes will also be checked. - Skin biopsy : The removal of skin cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.
What is the outlook for Merkel Cell Carcinoma ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (the size of the tumor and whether it has spread to the lymph nodes or other parts of the body). - Where the cancer is in the body. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). - The patient's age and general health. Prognosis also depends on how deeply the tumor has grown into the skin.
What are the stages of Merkel Cell Carcinoma ?
  - After Merkel cell carcinoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for Merkel cell carcinoma: - Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) - Stage IA - Stage IB - Stage IIA - Stage IIB - Stage IIC - Stage IIIA - Stage IIIB - Stage IV After Merkel cell carcinoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. A CT scan of the chest and abdomen may be used to check for primary small cell lung cancer, or to find Merkel cell carcinoma that has spread. A CT scan of the head and neck may also be used to find Merkel cell carcinoma that has spread to the lymph nodes. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - Lymph node biopsy : There are two main types of lymph node biopsy used to stage Merkel cell carcinoma. - Sentinel lymph node biopsy : The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. - Lymph node dissection : A surgical procedure in which the lymph nodes are removed and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. For a regional lymph node dissection, some of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. For a radical lymph node dissection, most or all of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. This procedure is also called lymphadenectomy. - Immunohistochemistry : A test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of tissue. The antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the tissue to light up under a microscope. This type of test may be used to tell the difference between different types of cancer. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if Merkel cell carcinoma spreads to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually cancerous Merkel cells. The disease is metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma, not liver cancer. The following stages are used for Merkel cell carcinoma: Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) In stage 0, the tumor is a group of abnormal cells that remain in the place where they first formed and have not spread. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread to lymph nodes or distant parts of the body. Stage IA In stage IA, the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller at its widest point and no cancer is found when the lymph nodes are checked under a microscope. Stage IB In stage IB, the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller at its widest point and no swollen lymph nodes are found by a physical exam or imaging tests. Stage IIA In stage IIA, the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters and no cancer is found when the lymph nodes are checked under a microscope. Stage IIB In stage IIB, the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters and no swollen lymph nodes are found by a physical exam or imaging tests. Stage IIC In stage IIC, the tumor may be any size and has spread to nearby bone, muscle, connective tissue, or cartilage. It has not spread to lymph nodes or distant parts of the body. Stage IIIA In stage IIIA, the tumor may be any size and may have spread to nearby bone, muscle, connective tissue, or cartilage. Cancer is found in the lymph nodes when they are checked under a microscope. Stage IIIB In stage IIIB, the tumor may be any size and may have spread to nearby bone, muscle, connective tissue, or cartilage. Cancer has spread to the lymph nodes near the tumor and is found by a physical exam or imaging test. The lymph nodes are removed and cancer is found in the lymph nodes when they are checked under a microscope. There may also be a second tumor, which is either: - Between the primary tumor and nearby lymph nodes; or - Farther away from the center of the body than the primary tumor is. Stage IV In stage IV, the tumor may be any size and has spread to distant parts of the body, such as the liver, lung, bone, or brain.
What are the treatments for Merkel Cell Carcinoma ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with Merkel cell carcinoma. - Three types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Treatment for Merkel cell carcinoma may cause side effects. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with Merkel cell carcinoma. Different types of treatments are available for patients with Merkel cell carcinoma. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Three types of standard treatment are used: Surgery One or more of the following surgical procedures may be used to treat Merkel cell carcinoma: - Wide local excision: The cancer is cut from the skin along with some of the tissue around it. A sentinel lymph node biopsy may be done during the wide local excision procedure. If there is cancer in the lymph nodes, a lymph node dissection also may be done. - Lymph node dissection: A surgical procedure in which the lymph nodes are removed and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. For a regional lymph node dissection, some of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed; for a radical lymph node dissection, most or all of the lymph nodes in the tumor area are removed. This procedure is also called lymphadenectomy. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat Merkel cell carcinoma, and may also be used as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Treatment for Merkel cell carcinoma may cause side effects. For information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our Side Effects page. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options by Stage Stage I and Stage II Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment of stage I and stage II Merkel cell carcinoma may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor, such as wide local excision with or without lymph node dissection. - Radiation therapy after surgery. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin and stage II neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment of stage III Merkel cell carcinoma may include the following: - Wide local excision with or without lymph node dissection. - Radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage IV Merkel Cell Carcinoma Treatment of stage IV Merkel cell carcinoma may include the following as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life: - Chemotherapy. - Surgery. - Radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Merkel Cell Carcinoma ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Skin Cancer ?
  - Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. - There are several types of skin cancer. - Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States. Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. The skin is the bodys largest organ. It protects against heat, sunlight, injury, and infection. Skin also helps control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D. The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (upper or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). The epidermis is made up of 3 kinds of cells: - Squamous cells are the thin, flat cells that make up most of the epidermis. - Basal cells are the round cells under the squamous cells. - Melanocytes are found throughout the lower part of the epidermis. They make melanin, the pigment that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun, melanocytes make more pigment, causing the skin to tan, or darken. The dermis contains blood and lymph vessels, hair follicles, and glands. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about skin cancer: - Skin Cancer Screening - Skin Cancer Treatment - Melanoma Treatment - Genetics of Skin Cancer There are several types of skin cancer. The most common types of skin cancer are squamous cell carcinoma, which forms in the squamous cells and basal cell carcinoma, which forms in the basal cells. Squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma are also called nonmelanoma skin cancers. Melanoma, which forms in the melanocytes, is a less common type of skin cancer that grows and spreads quickly. Skin cancer can occur anywhere on the body, but it is most common in areas exposed to sunlight, such as the face, neck, hands, and arms. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States. Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are the most common types of skin cancer in the United States. The number of new cases of nonmelanoma skin cancer appears to be increasing every year. These nonmelanoma skin cancers can usually be cured. The number of new cases of melanoma has been increasing for at least 30 years. Melanoma is more likely to spread to nearby tissues and other parts of the body and can be harder to cure. Finding and treating melanoma skin cancer early may help prevent death from melanoma.
How to prevent Skin Cancer ?
  - Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. - Being exposed to ultraviolet radiation is a risk factor for skin cancer. - It is not known if the following lower the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer: - Sunscreen use and avoiding sun exposure - Chemopreventive agents - It is not known if the following lower the risk of melanoma: - Sunscreen - Counseling and protecting the skin from the sun - Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - New ways to prevent skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. Being exposed to ultraviolet radiation is a risk factor for skin cancer. Some studies suggest that being exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiation and the sensitivity of a persons skin to UV radiation are risk factors for skin cancer. UV radiation is the name for the invisible rays that are part of the energy that comes from the sun. Sunlamps and tanning beds also give off UV radiation. Risk factors for nonmelanoma and melanoma cancers are not the same. - Risk factors for nonmelanoma skin cancer: - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Having actinic keratosis. - Past treatment with radiation. - Having a weakened immune system. - Being exposed to arsenic. - Risk factors for melanoma skin cancer: - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Having a history of many blistering sunburns, especially as a child or teenager. - Having several large or many small moles. - Having a family history of unusual moles (atypical nevus syndrome). - Having a family or personal history of melanoma. - Being white. It is not known if the following lower the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer: Sunscreen use and avoiding sun exposure It is not known if nonmelanoma skin cancer risk is decreased by staying out of the sun, using sunscreens, or wearing protective clothing when outdoors. This is because not enough studies have been done to prove this. Sunscreen may help decrease the amount of UV radiation to the skin. One study found that wearing sunscreen can help prevent actinic keratoses, scaly patches of skin that sometimes become squamous cell carcinoma. The harms of using sunscreen are likely to be small and include allergic reactions to skin creams and lower levels of vitamin D made in the skin because of less sun exposure. It is also possible that when a person uses sunscreen to avoid sunburn they may spend too much time in the sun and be exposed to harmful UV radiation. Although protecting the skin and eyes from the sun has not been proven to lower the chance of getting skin cancer, skin experts suggest the following: - Use sunscreen that protects against UV radiation. - Do not stay out in the sun for long periods of time, especially when the sun is at its strongest. - Wear long sleeve shirts, long pants, sun hats, and sunglasses, when outdoors. Chemopreventive agents Chemoprevention is the use of drugs, vitamins, or other agents to try to reduce the risk of cancer. The following chemopreventive agents have been studied to find whether they lower the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer: Beta carotene Studies of beta carotene (taken as a supplement in pills) have not shown that it prevents nonmelanoma skin cancer from forming or coming back. Isotretinoin High doses of isotretinoin have been shown to prevent new skin cancers in patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. However, isotretinoin has not been shown to prevent nonmelanoma skin cancers from coming back in patients previously treated for nonmelanoma skin cancers. Treatment with isotretinoin can cause serious side effects. Selenium Studies have shown that selenium (taken in brewer's yeast tablets) does not lower the risk of basal cell carcinoma, and may increase the risk of squamous cell carcinoma. Celecoxib A study of celecoxib in patients with actinic keratosis and a history of nonmelanoma skin cancer found those who took celecoxib had slightly lower rates of recurrent nonmelanoma skin cancers. Celecoxib may have serious side effects on the heart and blood vessels. Alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) A study of alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in patients with a history of nonmelanoma skin cancer showed that those who took DFMO had lower rates of nonmelanoma skin cancers coming back than those who took a placebo. DFMO may cause hearing loss which is usually temporary. Nicotinamide (vitamin B3) Studies have shown that nicotinamide (vitamin B3) helps prevent new actinic keratoses lesions from forming in people who had four or fewer actinic lesions before taking nicotinamide. More studies are needed to find out if nicotinamide prevents nonmelanoma skin cancer from forming or coming back. It is not known if the following lower the risk of melanoma: Sunscreen It has not been proven that using sunscreen to prevent sunburn can protect against melanoma caused by UV radiation. Other risk factors such as having skin that burns easily, having a large number of benign moles, or having atypical nevi may also play a role in whether melanoma forms. Counseling and protecting the skin from the sun It is not known if people who receive counseling or information about avoiding sun exposure make changes in their behavior to protect their skin from the sun. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. New ways to prevent skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials can be found in the Clinical Trials section of the NCI Web site. Check NCI's list of cancer clinical trials for nonmelanoma skin cancer prevention trials and melanoma prevention trials that are now accepting patients.
Who is at risk for Skin Cancer? ?
  - Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. - Being exposed to ultraviolet radiation is a risk factor for skin cancer. - It is not known if the following lower the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer: - Sunscreen use and avoiding sun exposure - Chemopreventive agents - It is not known if the following lower the risk of melanoma: - Sunscreen - Counseling and protecting the skin from the sun - Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - New ways to prevent skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. Being exposed to ultraviolet radiation is a risk factor for skin cancer. Some studies suggest that being exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiation and the sensitivity of a persons skin to UV radiation are risk factors for skin cancer. UV radiation is the name for the invisible rays that are part of the energy that comes from the sun. Sunlamps and tanning beds also give off UV radiation. Risk factors for nonmelanoma and melanoma cancers are not the same. - Risk factors for nonmelanoma skin cancer: - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Having actinic keratosis. - Past treatment with radiation. - Having a weakened immune system. - Being exposed to arsenic. - Risk factors for melanoma skin cancer: - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Having a history of many blistering sunburns, especially as a child or teenager. - Having several large or many small moles. - Having a family history of unusual moles (atypical nevus syndrome). - Having a family or personal history of melanoma. - Being white. It is not known if the following lower the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer: Sunscreen use and avoiding sun exposure It is not known if nonmelanoma skin cancer risk is decreased by staying out of the sun, using sunscreens, or wearing protective clothing when outdoors. This is because not enough studies have been done to prove this. Sunscreen may help decrease the amount of UV radiation to the skin. One study found that wearing sunscreen can help prevent actinic keratoses, scaly patches of skin that sometimes become squamous cell carcinoma. The harms of using sunscreen are likely to be small and include allergic reactions to skin creams and lower levels of vitamin D made in the skin because of less sun exposure. It is also possible that when a person uses sunscreen to avoid sunburn they may spend too much time in the sun and be exposed to harmful UV radiation. Although protecting the skin and eyes from the sun has not been proven to lower the chance of getting skin cancer, skin experts suggest the following: - Use sunscreen that protects against UV radiation. - Do not stay out in the sun for long periods of time, especially when the sun is at its strongest. - Wear long sleeve shirts, long pants, sun hats, and sunglasses, when outdoors. Chemopreventive agents Chemoprevention is the use of drugs, vitamins, or other agents to try to reduce the risk of cancer. The following chemopreventive agents have been studied to find whether they lower the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer: Beta carotene Studies of beta carotene (taken as a supplement in pills) have not shown that it prevents nonmelanoma skin cancer from forming or coming back. Isotretinoin High doses of isotretinoin have been shown to prevent new skin cancers in patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. However, isotretinoin has not been shown to prevent nonmelanoma skin cancers from coming back in patients previously treated for nonmelanoma skin cancers. Treatment with isotretinoin can cause serious side effects. Selenium Studies have shown that selenium (taken in brewer's yeast tablets) does not lower the risk of basal cell carcinoma, and may increase the risk of squamous cell carcinoma. Celecoxib A study of celecoxib in patients with actinic keratosis and a history of nonmelanoma skin cancer found those who took celecoxib had slightly lower rates of recurrent nonmelanoma skin cancers. Celecoxib may have serious side effects on the heart and blood vessels. Alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) A study of alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in patients with a history of nonmelanoma skin cancer showed that those who took DFMO had lower rates of nonmelanoma skin cancers coming back than those who took a placebo. DFMO may cause hearing loss which is usually temporary. Nicotinamide (vitamin B3) Studies have shown that nicotinamide (vitamin B3) helps prevent new actinic keratoses lesions from forming in people who had four or fewer actinic lesions before taking nicotinamide. More studies are needed to find out if nicotinamide prevents nonmelanoma skin cancer from forming or coming back. It is not known if the following lower the risk of melanoma: Sunscreen It has not been proven that using sunscreen to prevent sunburn can protect against melanoma caused by UV radiation. Other risk factors such as having skin that burns easily, having a large number of benign moles, or having atypical nevi may also play a role in whether melanoma forms. Counseling and protecting the skin from the sun It is not known if people who receive counseling or information about avoiding sun exposure make changes in their behavior to protect their skin from the sun.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Skin Cancer ?
Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. New ways to prevent skin cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials can be found in the Clinical Trials section of the NCI Web site. Check NCI's list of cancer clinical trials for nonmelanoma skin cancer prevention trials and melanoma prevention trials that are now accepting patients.
What is are Skin Cancer ?
  - Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. - Nonmelanoma skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States. - Being exposed to ultraviolet radiation may increase the risk of skin cancer. Skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. The skin is the body's largest organ. It protects against heat, sunlight, injury, and infection. Skin also helps control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin D. The skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (top or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). Skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells: - Squamous cells: Thin, flat cells that form the top layer of the epidermis. Cancer that forms in squamous cells is called squamous cell carcinoma. - Basal cells: Round cells under the squamous cells. Cancer that forms in basal cells is called basal cell carcinoma. - Melanocytes: Found in the lower part of the epidermis, these cells make melanin, the pigment that gives skin its natural color. When skin is exposed to the sun, melanocytes make more pigment and cause the skin to tan, or darken. Cancer that forms in melanocytes is called melanoma. Nonmelanoma skin cancer is the most common cancer in the United States. Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are also called nonmelanoma skin cancer and are the most common forms of skin cancer. Most basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers can be cured. Melanoma is more likely to spread to nearby tissues and other parts of the body and can be harder to cure. Melanoma is easier to cure if the tumor is found before it spreads to the dermis (inner layer of skin). Melanoma is less likely to cause death when it is found and treated early. In the United States, the number of cases of nonmelanoma skin cancer seems to have increased in recent years. The number of cases of melanoma has increased over the last 30 years. Part of the reason for these increases may be that people are more aware of skin cancer. They are more likely to have skin exams and biopsies and to be diagnosed with skin cancer. Over the past 20 years, the number of deaths from melanoma has decreased slightly among white men and women younger than 50 years. During that time, the number of deaths from melanoma has increased slightly among white men older than 50 years and stayed about the same among white women older than 50 years. The number of cases of childhood melanoma diagnosed in the United States is low, but increasing over time. The number of childhood deaths from melanoma has stayed about the same. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about skin cancer: - Skin Cancer Prevention - Skin Cancer Treatment - Melanoma Treatment - Genetics of Skin Cancer
Who is at risk for Skin Cancer? ?
Being exposed to ultraviolet radiation may increase the risk of skin cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. People who think they may be at risk should discuss this with their doctor. Being exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiation and having skin that is sensitive to UV radiation are risk factors for skin cancer. UV radiation is the name for the invisible rays that are part of the energy that comes from the sun. Sunlamps and tanning beds also give off UV radiation. Risk factors for nonmelanoma and melanoma cancers are not the same. - Nonmelanoma skin cancer risk factors include: - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Having actinic keratosis. - Past treatment with radiation. - Having a weakened immune system. - Being exposed to arsenic. - Melanoma skin cancer risk factors include: - Having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - Fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - Blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - Red or blond hair. - Being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - Having a history of many blistering sunburns, especially as a child or teenager. - Having several large or many small moles. - Having a family history of unusual moles (atypical nevus syndrome). - Having a family or personal history of melanoma. - Being white.
What is are Plasma Cell Neoplasms (Including Multiple Myeloma) ?
  - Plasma cell neoplasms are diseases in which the body makes too many plasma cells. - Plasma cell neoplasms can be benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer). - There are several types of plasma cell neoplasms. - Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) - Plasmacytoma - Multiple myeloma - Multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms may cause a condition called amyloidosis. - Age can affect the risk of plasma cell neoplasms. - Tests that examine the blood, bone marrow, and urine are used to detect (find) and diagnose multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Plasma cell neoplasms are diseases in which the body makes too many plasma cells. Plasma cells develop from B lymphocytes (B cells), a type of white blood cell that is made in the bone marrow. Normally, when bacteria or viruses enter the body, some of the B cells will change into plasma cells. The plasma cells make antibodies to fight bacteria and viruses, to stop infection and disease. Plasma cell neoplasms are diseases in which abnormal plasma cells or myeloma cells form tumors in the bones or soft tissues of the body. The plasma cells also make an antibody protein, called M protein, that is not needed by the body and does not help fight infection. These antibody proteins build up in the bone marrow and can cause the blood to thicken or can damage the kidneys. Plasma cell neoplasms can be benign (not cancer) or malignant (cancer). Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is not cancer but can become cancer. The following types of plasma cell neoplasms are cancer: - Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. (See Adult Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Treatment for more information.) - Plasmacytoma. - Multiple myeloma. There are several types of plasma cell neoplasms. Plasma cell neoplasms include the following: Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) In this type of plasma cell neoplasm, less than 10% of the bone marrow is made up of abnormal plasma cells and there is no cancer. The abnormal plasma cells make M protein, which is sometimes found during a routine blood or urine test. In most patients, the amount of M protein stays the same and there are no signs, symptoms, or health problems. In some patients, MGUS may later become a more serious condition, such as amyloidosis, or cause problems with the kidneys, heart, or nerves. MGUS can also become cancer, such as multiple myeloma, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, or chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Plasmacytoma In this type of plasma cell neoplasm, the abnormal plasma cells (myeloma cells) are in one place and form one tumor, called a plasmacytoma. Sometimes plasmacytoma can be cured. There are two types of plasmacytoma. - In isolated plasmacytoma of bone, one plasma cell tumor is found in the bone, less than 10% of the bone marrow is made up of plasma cells, and there are no other signs of cancer. Plasmacytoma of the bone often becomes multiple myeloma. - In extramedullary plasmacytoma, one plasma cell tumor is found in soft tissue but not in the bone or the bone marrow. Extramedullary plasmacytomas commonly form in tissues of the throat, tonsil, and paranasal sinuses. Signs and symptoms depend on where the tumor is. - In bone, the plasmacytoma may cause pain or broken bones. - In soft tissue, the tumor may press on nearby areas and cause pain or other problems. For example, a plasmacytoma in the throat can make it hard to swallow. Multiple myeloma In multiple myeloma, abnormal plasma cells (myeloma cells) build up in the bone marrow and form tumors in many bones of the body. These tumors may keep the bone marrow from making enough healthy blood cells. Normally, the bone marrow makes stem cells (immature cells) that become three types of mature blood cells: - Red blood cells that carry oxygen and other substances to all tissues of the body. - White blood cells that fight infection and disease. - Platelets that form blood clots to help prevent bleeding. As the number of myeloma cells increases, fewer red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets are made. The myeloma cells also damage and weaken the bone. Sometimes multiple myeloma does not cause any signs or symptoms. This is called smoldering multiple myeloma. It may be found when a blood or urine test is done for another condition. Signs and symptoms may be caused by multiple myeloma or other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Bone pain, especially in the back or ribs. - Bones that break easily. - Fever for no known reason or frequent infections. - Easy bruising or bleeding. - Trouble breathing. - Weakness of the arms or legs. - Feeling very tired. A tumor can damage the bone and cause hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood). This can affect many organs in the body, including the kidneys, nerves, heart, muscles, and digestive tract, and cause serious health problems. Hypercalcemia may cause the following signs and symptoms: - Loss of appetite. - Nausea or vomiting. - Feeling thirsty. - Frequent urination. - Constipation. - Feeling very tired. - Muscle weakness. - Restlessness. - Confusion or trouble thinking. Multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms may cause a condition called amyloidosis. In rare cases, multiple myeloma can cause peripheral nerves (nerves that are not in the brain or spinal cord) and organs to fail. This may be caused by a condition called amyloidosis. Antibody proteins build up and stick together in peripheral nerves and organs, such as the kidney and heart. This can cause the nerves and organs to become stiff and unable to work the way they should. Amyloidosis may cause the following signs and symptoms: - Feeling very tired. - Purple spots on the skin. - Enlarged tongue. - Diarrhea. - Swelling caused by fluid in your body's tissues. - Tingling or numbness in your legs and feet.
Who is at risk for Plasma Cell Neoplasms (Including Multiple Myeloma)? ?
Age can affect the risk of plasma cell neoplasms. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Plasma cell neoplasms are most common in people who are middle aged or older. For multiple myeloma and plasmacytoma, other risk factors include the following: - Being black. - Being male. - Having a personal history of MGUS or plasmacytoma. - Being exposed to radiation or certain chemicals.
How to diagnose Plasma Cell Neoplasms (Including Multiple Myeloma) ?
Tests that examine the blood, bone marrow, and urine are used to detect (find) and diagnose multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Blood and urine immunoglobulin studies: A procedure in which a blood or urine sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain antibodies (immunoglobulins). For multiple myeloma, beta-2-microglobulin, M protein, free light chains, and other proteins made by the myeloma cells are measured. A higher-than-normal amount of these substances can be a sign of disease. - Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy : The removal of bone marrow, blood, and a small piece of bone by inserting a hollow needle into the hipbone or breastbone. A pathologist views the bone marrow, blood, and bone under a microscope to look for abnormal cells. The following test may be done on the sample of tissue removed during the bone marrow aspiration and biopsy: - Cytogenetic analysis : A test in which cells in a sample of bone marrow are viewed under a microscope to look for certain changes in the chromosomes. Other tests, such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and flow cytometry, may also be done to look for certain changes in the chromosomes. - Skeletal bone survey: In a skeletal bone survey, x-rays of all the bones in the body are taken. The x-rays are used to find areas where the bone is damaged. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - Complete blood count (CBC) with differential : A procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - The number of red blood cells and platelets. - The number and type of white blood cells. - The amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - The portion of the blood sample made up of red blood cells. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances, such as calcium or albumin, released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - Twenty-four-hour urine test: A test in which urine is collected for 24 hours to measure the amounts of certain substances. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease in the organ or tissue that makes it. A higher than normal amount of protein may be a sign of multiple myeloma. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). An MRI of the spine and pelvis may be used to find areas where the bone is damaged. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the spine, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - PET-CT scan : A procedure that combines the pictures from a positron emission tomography (PET) scan and a computed tomography (CT) scan. The PET and CT scans are done at the same time with the same machine. The combined scans give more detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the spine, than either scan gives by itself.
What is the outlook for Plasma Cell Neoplasms (Including Multiple Myeloma) ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) depends on the following: - The type of plasma cell neoplasm. - The stage of the disease. - Whether a certain immunoglobulin (antibody) is present. - Whether there are certain genetic changes. - Whether the kidney is damaged. - Whether the cancer responds to initial treatment or recurs (comes back). Treatment options depend on the following: - The type of plasma cell neoplasm. - The age and general health of the patient. - Whether there are signs, symptoms, or health problems, such as kidney failure or infection, related to the disease. - Whether the cancer responds to initial treatment or recurs (comes back).
What are the stages of Plasma Cell Neoplasms (Including Multiple Myeloma) ?
  - There are no standard staging systems for monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), macroglobulinemia, and plasmacytoma. - After multiple myeloma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out the amount of cancer in the body. - The stage of multiple myeloma is based on the levels of beta-2-microglobulin and albumin in the blood. - The following stages are used for multiple myeloma: - Stage I multiple myeloma - Stage II multiple myeloma - Stage III multiple myeloma There are no standard staging systems for monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), macroglobulinemia, and plasmacytoma. After multiple myeloma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out the amount of cancer in the body. The process used to find out the amount of cancer in the body is called staging. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - Skeletal bone survey: In a skeletal bone survey, x-rays of all the bones in the body are taken. The x-rays are used to find areas where the bone is damaged. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the bone marrow. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Bone densitometry: A procedure that uses a special type of x-ray to measure bone density. The stage of multiple myeloma is based on the levels of beta-2-microglobulin and albumin in the blood. Beta-2-microglobulin and albumin are found in the blood. Beta-2-microglobulin is a protein found on plasma cells. Albumin makes up the biggest part of the blood plasma. It keeps fluid from leaking out of blood vessels. It also brings nutrients to tissues, and carries hormones, vitamins, drugs, and other substances, such as calcium, all through the body. In the blood of patients with multiple myeloma, the amount of beta-2-microglobulin is increased and the amount of albumin is decreased. The following stages are used for multiple myeloma: Stage I multiple myeloma In stage I multiple myeloma, the blood levels are as follows: - beta-2-microglobulin level is lower than 3.5 mg/L; and - albumin level is 3.5 g/dL or higher. Stage II multiple myeloma In stage II multiple myeloma, the blood levels are in between the levels for stage I and stage III. Stage III multiple myeloma In stage III multiple myeloma, the blood level of beta-2-microglobulin is 5.5 mg/L or higher and the patient also has one of the following: - high levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH); or - certain changes in the chromosomes.
What are the treatments for Plasma Cell Neoplasms (Including Multiple Myeloma) ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with plasma cell neoplasms. - Eight types of treatment are used: - Chemotherapy - Other drug therapy - Targeted therapy - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant - Biologic therapy - Radiation therapy - Surgery - Watchful waiting - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - New combinations of therapies - Supportive care is given to lessen the problems caused by the disease or its treatment. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with plasma cell neoplasms. Different types of treatments are available for patients with plasma cell neoplasms. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Eight types of treatment are used: Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. See Drugs Approved for Multiple Myeloma and Other Plasma Cell Neoplasms for more information. Other drug therapy Corticosteroids are steroids that have antitumor effects in multiple myeloma. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Several types of targeted therapy may be used to treat multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. Proteasome inhibitor therapy is a type of targeted therapy that blocks the action of proteasomes in cancer cells and may prevent the growth of tumors. Bortezomib, carfilzomib, ixazomib, daratumumab, and elotuzumab are proteasome inhibitors used in the treatment of multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor therapy is a type of targeted therapy that blocks enzymes needed for cell division and may stop the growth of cancer cells. Panobinostat is an HDAC inhibitor used in the treatment of multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. See Drugs Approved for Multiple Myeloma and Other Plasma Cell Neoplasms for more information. High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant This treatment is a way of giving high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient (autologous transplant) or a donor (allogeneic transplant) and are frozen and stored. After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the body's blood cells. Biologic therapy Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or immunotherapy. Immunomodulators are a type of biologic therapy. Thalidomide, lenalidomide, and pomalidomide are immunomodulators used to treat multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. Interferon is a type of biologic therapy. It affects the division of cancer cells and can slow tumor growth. See Drugs Approved for Multiple Myeloma and Other Plasma Cell Neoplasms for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat plasma cell neoplasms. Surgery Surgery to remove the tumor may be done and is usually followed by radiation therapy. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Watchful waiting Watchful waiting is closely monitoring a patients condition without giving any treatment until signs or symptoms appear or change. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. New combinations of therapies Clinical trials are studying different combinations of biologic therapy, chemotherapy, steroid therapy, and drugs. New treatment regimens using thalidomide or lenalidomide are also being studied. Supportive care is given to lessen the problems caused by the disease or its treatment. This therapy controls problems or side effects caused by the disease or its treatment, and improves quality of life. Supportive care is given to treat problems caused by multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. Supportive care may include the following: - Plasmapheresis: If the blood becomes thick with extra antibody proteins and interferes with circulation, plasmapheresis is done to remove extra plasma and antibody proteins from the blood. In this procedure blood is removed from the patient and sent through a machine that separates the plasma (the liquid part of the blood) from the blood cells. The patient's plasma contains the unneeded antibodies and is not returned to the patient. The normal blood cells are returned to the bloodstream along with donated plasma or a plasma replacement. Plasmapheresis does not keep new antibodies from forming. - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant: If amyloidosis occurs, treatment may include high-dose chemotherapy followed by stem cell transplant using the patient's own stem cells. - Biologic therapy: Biologic therapy with thalidomide, lenalidomide, or pomalidomide is given to treat amyloidosis. - Targeted therapy: Targeted therapy with proteasome inhibitors is given to treat amyloidosis. - Radiation therapy: Radiation therapy is given for bone lesions of the spine. - Chemotherapy: Chemotherapy is given to reduce back pain from osteoporosis or compression fractures of the spine. - Bisphosphonate therapy: Bisphosphonate therapy is given to slow bone loss and reduce bone pain. See the following PDQ summaries for more information on bisphosphonates and problems related to their use: - Cancer Pain - Oral Complications of Chemotherapy and Head-Neck Radiation Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Plasma Cell Neoplasms Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance Treatment of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is usually watchful waiting. Regular blood tests to check the level of M protein in the blood and physical exams to check for signs or symptoms of cancer will be done. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Isolated Plasmacytoma of Bone Treatment of isolated plasmacytoma of bone is usually radiation therapy to the bone lesion. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with isolated plasmacytoma of bone. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Extramedullary Plasmacytoma Treatment of extramedullary plasmacytoma may include the following: - Radiation therapy to the tumor and nearby lymph nodes. - Surgery, usually followed by radiation therapy. - Watchful waiting after initial treatment, followed by radiation therapy, surgery, or chemotherapy if the tumor grows or causes signs or symptoms. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with extramedullary plasmacytoma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Multiple Myeloma Patients without signs or symptoms may not need treatment. When signs or symptoms appear, the treatment of multiple myeloma may be done in phases: - Induction therapy : This is the first phase of treatment. Its goal is to reduce the amount of disease, and may include one or more of the following: - Corticosteroid therapy. - Biologic therapy with lenalidomide, pomalidomide, or thalidomide therapy. - Targeted therapy with proteasome inhibitors (bortezomib, carfilzomib, ixazomib, daratumumab, and elotuzumab). - Chemotherapy. - Histone deacetylase inhibitor therapy with panobinostat. - A clinical trial of different combinations of treatment. - Consolidation chemotherapy : This is the second phase of treatment. Treatment in the consolidation phase is to kill any remaining cancer cells. High-dose chemotherapy is followed by either: - one autologous stem cell transplant, in which the patient's stem cells from the blood or bone marrow are used; or - two autologous stem cell transplants followed by an autologous or allogeneic stem cell transplant, in which the patient receives stem cells from the blood or bone marrow of a donor; or - one allogeneic stem cell transplant. - Maintenance therapy : After the initial treatment, maintenance therapy is often given to help keep the disease in remission for a longer time. Several types of treatment are being studied for this use, including the following: - Chemotherapy. - Biologic therapy with interferon. - Corticosteroid therapy. - Lenalidomide therapy. - Targeted therapy with a proteasome inhibitor (bortezomib). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with multiple myeloma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Refractory Multiple Myeloma Treatment of refractory multiple myeloma may include the following: - Watchful waiting for patients whose disease is stable. - A different treatment than treatment already given, for patients whose tumor kept growing during treatment. (See Multiple Myeloma treatment options.) - A clinical trial of a new therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with refractory multiple myeloma. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Plasma Cell Neoplasms (Including Multiple Myeloma) ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. New combinations of therapies Clinical trials are studying different combinations of biologic therapy, chemotherapy, steroid therapy, and drugs. New treatment regimens using thalidomide or lenalidomide are also being studied. Supportive care is given to lessen the problems caused by the disease or its treatment. This therapy controls problems or side effects caused by the disease or its treatment, and improves quality of life. Supportive care is given to treat problems caused by multiple myeloma and other plasma cell neoplasms. Supportive care may include the following: - Plasmapheresis: If the blood becomes thick with extra antibody proteins and interferes with circulation, plasmapheresis is done to remove extra plasma and antibody proteins from the blood. In this procedure blood is removed from the patient and sent through a machine that separates the plasma (the liquid part of the blood) from the blood cells. The patient's plasma contains the unneeded antibodies and is not returned to the patient. The normal blood cells are returned to the bloodstream along with donated plasma or a plasma replacement. Plasmapheresis does not keep new antibodies from forming. - High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant: If amyloidosis occurs, treatment may include high-dose chemotherapy followed by stem cell transplant using the patient's own stem cells. - Biologic therapy: Biologic therapy with thalidomide, lenalidomide, or pomalidomide is given to treat amyloidosis. - Targeted therapy: Targeted therapy with proteasome inhibitors is given to treat amyloidosis. - Radiation therapy: Radiation therapy is given for bone lesions of the spine. - Chemotherapy: Chemotherapy is given to reduce back pain from osteoporosis or compression fractures of the spine. - Bisphosphonate therapy: Bisphosphonate therapy is given to slow bone loss and reduce bone pain. See the following PDQ summaries for more information on bisphosphonates and problems related to their use: - Cancer Pain - Oral Complications of Chemotherapy and Head-Neck Radiation Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials
What is are Neuroblastoma ?
  - Neuroblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in neuroblasts (immature nerve tissue) in the adrenal gland, neck, chest, or spinal cord. - Neuroblastoma is sometimes caused by a gene mutation (change) passed from the parent to the child. - Signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma include bone pain and a lump in the abdomen, neck, or chest. - Tests that examine many different body tissues and fluids are used to detect (find) and diagnose neuroblastoma. - A biopsy is done to diagnose neuroblastoma. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Neuroblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in neuroblasts (immature nerve tissue) in the adrenal gland, neck, chest, or spinal cord. Neuroblastoma often begins in the nerve tissue of the adrenal glands. There are two adrenal glands, one on top of each kidney in the back of the upper abdomen. The adrenal glands make important hormones that help control heart rate, blood pressure, blood sugar, and the way the body reacts to stress. Neuroblastoma may also begin in nerve tissue in the neck, chest, abdomen or pelvis. Neuroblastoma most often begins in infancy and may be diagnosed in the first month of life. It is found when the tumor begins to grow and cause signs or symptoms. Sometimes it forms before birth and is found during a fetal ultrasound. By the time neuroblastoma is diagnosed, the cancer has usually metastasized (spread). Neuroblastoma spreads most often to the lymph nodes, bones, bone marrow, and liver. In infants, it also spreads to the skin.
Is Neuroblastoma inherited ?
Neuroblastoma is sometimes caused by a gene mutation (change) passed from the parent to the child. Gene mutations that increase the risk of neuroblastoma are sometimes inherited (passed from the parent to the child). In children with a gene mutation, neuroblastoma usually occurs at a younger age and more than one tumor may form in the adrenal glands.
What are the symptoms of Neuroblastoma ?
Signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma include bone pain and a lump in the abdomen, neck, or chest.The most common signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma are caused by the tumor pressing on nearby tissues as it grows or by cancer spreading to the bone. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by neuroblastoma or by other conditions. Check with your childs doctor if your child has any of the following: - Lump in the abdomen, neck, or chest. - Bulging eyes. - Dark circles around the eyes ("black eyes"). - Bone pain. - Swollen stomach and trouble breathing (in infants). - Painless, bluish lumps under the skin (in infants). - Weakness or paralysis (loss of ability to move a body part). Less common signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma include the following: - Fever. - Shortness of breath. - Feeling tired. - Easy bruising or bleeding. - Petechiae (flat, pinpoint spots under the skin caused by bleeding). - High blood pressure. - Severe watery diarrhea. - Horner syndrome (droopy eyelid, smaller pupil, and less sweating on one side of the face). - Jerky muscle movements. - Uncontrolled eye movements.
How to diagnose Neuroblastoma ?
Tests that examine many different body tissues and fluids are used to detect (find) and diagnose neuroblastoma. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Neurological exam : A series of questions and tests to check the brain, spinal cord, and nerve function. The exam checks a persons mental status, coordination, and ability to walk normally, and how well the muscles, senses, and reflexes work. This may also be called a neuro exam or a neurologic exam. - Urine catecholamine studies: A procedure in which a urine sample is checked to measure the amount of certain substances, vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) and homovanillic acid (HVA), that are made when catecholamines break down and are released into the urine. A higher than normal amount of VMA or HVA can be a sign of neuroblastoma. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - X-ray : An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) with gadolinium : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - mIBG (metaiodobenzylguanidine) scan : A procedure used to find neuroendocrine tumors, such as neuroblastoma. A very small amount of a substance called radioactive mIBG is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. Neuroendocrine tumor cells take up the radioactive mIBG and are detected by a scanner. Scans may be taken over 1-3 days. An iodine solution may be given before or during the test to keep the thyroid gland from absorbing too much of the mIBG. This test is also used to find out how well the tumor is responding to treatment. mIBG is used in high doses to treat neuroblastoma. - Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy : The removal of bone marrow, blood, and a small piece of bone by inserting a hollow needle into the hipbone or breastbone. A pathologist views the bone marrow, blood, and bone under a microscope to look for signs of cancer. - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. The picture can be printed to be looked at later. An ultrasound exam is not done if a CT/MRI has been done.
What is the outlook for Neuroblastoma ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - Age of the child at the time of diagnosis. - The child's risk group. - Whether there are certain changes in the genes. - Where in the body the tumor started. - Tumor histology (the shape, function, and structure of the tumor cells). - Whether there is cancer in the lymph nodes on the same side of the body as the primary cancer or whether there is cancer in the lymph nodes on the opposite side of the body. - How the tumor responds to treatment. - How much time passed between diagnosis and when the cancer recurred (for recurrent cancer). Prognosis and treatment options for neuroblastoma are also affected by tumor biology, which includes: - The patterns of the tumor cells. - How different the tumor cells are from normal cells. - How fast the tumor cells are growing. - Whether the tumor shows MYCN amplification. - Whether the tumor has changes in the ALK gene. The tumor biology is said to be favorable or unfavorable, depending on these factors. A favorable tumor biology means there is a better chance of recovery. In some children up to 6 months old, neuroblastoma may disappear without treatment. This is called spontaneous regression. The child is closely watched for signs or symptoms of neuroblastoma. If signs or symptoms occur, treatment may be needed.
What are the stages of Neuroblastoma ?
  - After neuroblastoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer has spread from where it started to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for neuroblastoma: - Stage 1 - Stage 2 - Stage 3 - Stage 4 - Treatment of neuroblastoma is based on risk groups. After neuroblastoma has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer has spread from where it started to other parts of the body. The process used to find out the extent or spread of cancer is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process helps determine the stage of the disease. For neuroblastoma, the stage of disease affects whether the cancer is low risk, intermediate risk, or high risk. It also affects the treatment plan. The results of some tests and procedures used to diagnose neuroblastoma may be used for staging. See the General Information section for a description of these tests and procedures. The following tests and procedures also may be used to determine the stage: - Lymph node biopsy : The removal of all or part of a lymph node. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. One of the following types of biopsies may be done: - Excisional biopsy : The removal of an entire lymph node. - Incisional biopsy : The removal of part of a lymph node. - Core biopsy : The removal of tissue from a lymph node using a wide needle. - Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy : The removal of tissue or fluid from a lymph node using a thin needle. - X-ray of the bone: An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in the bones with cancer and is detected by a scanner. - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if neuroblastoma spreads to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually neuroblastoma cells. The disease is metastatic neuroblastoma, not liver cancer. The following stages are used for neuroblastoma: Stage 1 In stage 1, the tumor is in only one area and all of the tumor that can be seen is completely removed during surgery. Stage 2 Stage 2 is divided into stages 2A and 2B. - Stage 2A: The tumor is in only one area and all of the tumor that can be seen cannot be completely removed during surgery. - Stage 2B: The tumor is in only one area and all of the tumor that can be seen may be completely removed during surgery. Cancer cells are found in the lymph nodes near the tumor. Stage 3 In stage 3, one of the following is true: - the tumor cannot be completely removed during surgery and has spread from one side of the body to the other side and may also have spread to nearby lymph nodes; or - the tumor is in only one area, on one side of the body, but has spread to lymph nodes on the other side of the body; or - the tumor is in the middle of the body and has spread to tissues or lymph nodes on both sides of the body, and the tumor cannot be removed by surgery. Stage 4 Stage 4 is divided into stages 4 and 4S. - In stage 4, the tumor has spread to distant lymph nodes or other parts of the body. - In stage 4S: - the child is younger than 12 months; and - the cancer has spread to the skin, liver, and/or bone marrow; and - the tumor is in only one area and all of the tumor that can be seen may be completely removed during surgery; and/or - cancer cells may be found in the lymph nodes near the tumor. Treatment of neuroblastoma is based on risk groups. For many types of cancer, stages are used to plan treatment. For neuroblastoma, treatment depends on risk groups. The stage of neuroblastoma is one factor used to determine risk group. Other factors are the age of the child, tumor histology, and tumor biology. There are three risk groups: low risk, intermediate risk, and high risk. - Low-risk and intermediate-risk neuroblastoma have a good chance of being cured. - High-risk neuroblastoma may be hard to cure.
What are the treatments for Neuroblastoma ?
  - There are different types of treatment for patients with neuroblastoma. - Children with neuroblastoma should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood cancer, especially neuroblastoma. - Children who are treated for neuroblastoma may have late effects, including an increased risk of second cancers. - Seven types of standard treatment are used: - Observation - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Iodine 131-mIBG therapy - Chemotherapy - High-dose chemotherapy and radiation therapy with stem cell rescue - Targeted therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Immunotherapy - Other drug therapy - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with neuroblastoma. Different types of treatment are available for patients with neuroblastoma. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Children with neuroblastoma should have their treatment planned by a team of doctors who are experts in treating childhood cancer, especially neuroblastoma. Treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. The pediatric oncologist works with other pediatric health care providers who are experts in treating children with neuroblastoma and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. These may include the following specialists: - Pediatric surgeon. - Pediatric radiation oncologist.. - Endocrinologist. - Neurologist. - Pediatric neuropathologist.. - Neuroradiologist. - Pediatrician. - Pediatric nurse specialist. - Social worker. - Child life professional. - Psychologist. Children who are treated for neuroblastoma may have late effects, including an increased risk of second cancers. Some cancer treatments cause side effects that continue or appear years after cancer treatment has ended. These are called late effects. Late effects of cancer treatment may include: - Physical problems. - Changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. - Second cancers (new types of cancer). Some late effects may be treated or controlled. It is important that parents of children who are treated for neuroblastoma talk with their doctors about the possible late effects caused by some treatments. See the PDQ summary on Late Effects of Treatment for Childhood Cancer for more information. Seven types of standard treatment are used: Observation Observation is closely monitoring a patient's condition without giving any treatment until signs or symptoms appear or change. Surgery Surgery is used to treat neuroblastoma unless it has spread to other parts of the body. Depending on where the tumor is, as much of the tumor as is safely possible will be removed. If the tumor cannot be removed, a biopsy may be done instead. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of cancer being treated and the child's risk group. External radiation therapy is used to treat neuroblastoma. Iodine 131-mIBG therapy Iodine 131-mIBG therapy is a treatment with radioactive iodine. The radioactive iodine is given through an intravenous (IV) line and enters the bloodstream which carries radiation directly to tumor cells. Radioactive iodine collects in neuroblastoma cells and kills them with the radiation that is given off. Iodine 131-mIBG therapy is sometimes used to treat high-risk neuroblastoma that comes back after initial treatment. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type of cancer being treated and the child's risk group. The use of two or more anticancer drugs is called combination chemotherapy. See Drugs Approved for Neuroblastoma for more information. High-dose chemotherapy and radiation therapy with stem cell rescue High-dose chemotherapy and radiation therapy with stem cell rescue is a way of giving high doses of chemotherapy and radiation therapy and replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by cancer treatment for high-risk neuroblastoma. Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient and are frozen and stored. After chemotherapy and radiation therapy are completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. These reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the body's blood cells. Maintenance therapy is given after high-dose chemotherapy and radiation therapy with stem cell rescue to kill any cancer cells that may regrow and cause the disease to come back. Maintenance therapy is given for 6 months and includes the following treatments: - Isotretinoin: A vitamin -like drug that slows the cancer's ability to make more cancer cells and changes how these cells look and act. This drug is taken by mouth. - Dinutuximab: A type of monoclonal antibody therapy that uses an antibody made in the laboratory from a single type of immune system cell. Dinutuximab identifies and attaches to a substance, called GD2, on the surface of neuroblastoma cells. Once dinutuximab attaches to the GD2, a signal is sent to the immune system that a foreign substance has been found and needs to be killed. Then the body's immune system kills the neuroblastoma cell. Dinutuximab is given by infusion. It is a type of targeted therapy. - Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF): A cytokine that helps make more immune system cells, especially granulocytes and macrophages (white blood cells), which can attack and kill cancer cells. - Interleukin-2 (IL-2): A type of immunotherapy that boosts the growth and activity of many immune cells, especially lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). Lymphocytes can attack and kill cancer cells. See Drugs Approved for Neuroblastoma for more information. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. There are different types of targeted therapy: - Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are small-molecule drugs that go through the cell membrane and work inside cancer cells to block signals that cancer cells need to grow and divide. Crizotinib is used to treat neuroblastoma that has come back after treatment. - Antibody-drug conjugates are made up of a monoclonal antibody attached to a drug. The monoclonal antibody binds to specific proteins or receptors found on certain cells, including cancer cells. The drug enters these cells and kills them without harming other cells. Lorvotuzumab mertansine is an antibody-drug conjugate being studied to treat neuroblastoma that has come back after treatment. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patients immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the bodys natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or biological therapy. Vaccine therapy uses a substance to stimulate the immune system to destroy a tumor. Vaccine therapy is being studied to treat neuroblastoma that has come back after treatment. Other drug therapy Lenalidomide is a type of angiogenesis inhibitor. It prevents the growth of new blood vessels that are needed by a tumor to grow. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Neuroblastoma Low-Risk Neuroblastoma Treatment of low-risk neuroblastoma may include the following: - Surgery followed by observation. - Chemotherapy with or without surgery, for children with symptoms, children whose tumor has continued to grow and cannot be removed by surgery, or children with unfavorable tumor biology. - Observation alone for infants younger than 6 months who have small adrenal tumors. - Observation alone for infants who do not have signs or symptoms of neuroblastoma. - Radiation therapy to treat tumors that are causing serious problems and do not respond quickly to chemotherapy or surgery. - A clinical trial of treatment based on the tumor's response to treatment and tumor biology. Intermediate-Risk Neuroblastoma Treatment of intermediate-risk neuroblastoma may include the following: - Chemotherapy for children with symptoms or to shrink a tumor that cannot be removed by surgery. Surgery may be done after chemotherapy. - Surgery alone for infants. - Observation alone for certain infants. - Radiation therapy to treat tumors that are causing serious problems and do not respond quickly to chemotherapy or surgery. - Radiation therapy for tumors that do not respond to other treatment. - A clinical trial of treatment based on the tumor's response to treatment and tumor biology. High-Risk Neuroblastoma Treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma may include the following: - A regimen of combination chemotherapy, surgery, stem cell rescue, radiation therapy, and monoclonal antibody therapy (dinutuximab) with interleukin-2 (IL-2), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and isotretinoin. Stage 4S Neuroblastoma There is no standard treatment for stage 4S neuroblastoma but treatment options include the following: - Observation with supportive care for certain children who have favorable tumor biology and do not have signs or symptoms. - Chemotherapy, for children who have signs or symptoms of neuroblastoma or unfavorable tumor biology, or for very young infants. - A clinical trial of treatment based on the tumor's response to treatment and tumor biology. Recurrent Neuroblastoma Patients First Treated for Low-Risk Neuroblastoma Treatment for recurrent neuroblastoma that is found only in the area where the cancer first formed may include the following: - Surgery followed by observation or chemotherapy. - Chemotherapy that may be followed by surgery. Treatment for recurrent neuroblastoma that has spread to other parts of the body may include the following: - Observation. - Chemotherapy. - Surgery followed by chemotherapy. - Treatment as for newly diagnosed high-risk neuroblastoma for children older than 1 year. Patients First Treated for Intermediate-Risk Neuroblastoma Treatment for recurrent neuroblastoma that is found only in the area where the cancer first formed may include the following: - Surgery that may be followed by chemotherapy. - Treatment as for newly diagnosed high-risk neuroblastoma for neuroblastoma that has spread to other parts of the body. Recurrent neuroblastoma that has spread to other parts of the body is treated the same way as newly diagnosed high-risk neuroblastoma. Patients First Treated for High-Risk Neuroblastoma Treatment for recurrent neuroblastoma may include the following: - Combination chemotherapy. - Iodine 131-mIBG therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. It may be given alone or in combination with other therapy, or before stem cell rescue. - A second course of high-dose chemotherapy and stem cell rescue. - Tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy (crizotinib) for patients with changes in the ALK gene. Because there is no standard treatment for recurrent neuroblastoma in patients first treated for high-risk neuroblastoma, patients may want to consider a clinical trial. For information about clinical trials, please see the NCI website. Patients with Recurrent CNS Neuroblastoma Treatment for neuroblastoma that recurs (comes back) in the central nervous system (CNS; brain and spinal cord) may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor in the CNS followed by radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of a new therapy. Treatments Being Studied for Progressive/Recurrent Neuroblastoma Some of the treatments being studied in clinical trials for neuroblastoma that recurs (comes back) or progresses (grows, spreads, or does not respond to treatment) include the following: - Combination chemotherapy and monoclonal antibody therapy (dinutuximab). - Lenalidomide and monoclonal antibody therapy (dinutuximab) with or without isotretinoin. - Iodine 131-mIBG given alone or with other anticancer drugs. - Immunotherapy (vaccine therapy). - Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (crizotinib) and combination chemotherapy. - Targeted therapy with an antibody-drug conjugate (lorvotuzumab mertansine).
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Neuroblastoma ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy is a treatment that uses the patients immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the bodys natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or biological therapy. Vaccine therapy uses a substance to stimulate the immune system to destroy a tumor. Vaccine therapy is being studied to treat neuroblastoma that has come back after treatment. Other drug therapy Lenalidomide is a type of angiogenesis inhibitor. It prevents the growth of new blood vessels that are needed by a tumor to grow. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Urethral Cancer ?
 Urethral cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the urethra. - There are different types of urethral cancer that begin in cells that line the urethra. - A history of bladder cancer can affect the risk of urethral cancer. - Signs of urethral cancer include bleeding or trouble with urination. - Tests that examine the urethra and bladder are used to detect (find) and diagnose urethral cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Urethral cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the urethra. The urethra is the tube that carries urine from the bladder to outside the body. In women, the urethra is about 1 inches long and is just above the vagina. In men, the urethra is about 8 inches long, and goes through the prostate gland and the penis to the outside of the body. In men, the urethra also carries semen. Urethral cancer is a rare cancer that occurs more often in men than in women. There are different types of urethral cancer that begin in cells that line the urethra. These cancers are named for the types of cells that become malignant (cancer): - Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type of urethral cancer. It forms in cells in the part of the urethra near the bladder in women, and in the lining of the urethra in the penis in men. - Transitional cell carcinoma forms in the area near the urethral opening in women, and in the part of the urethra that goes through the prostate gland in men. - Adenocarcinoma forms in the glands that are around the urethra in both men and women. Urethral cancer can metastasize (spread) quickly to tissues around the urethra and is often found in nearby lymph nodes by the time it is diagnosed. A history of bladder cancer can affect the risk of urethral cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for urethral cancer include the following: - Having a history of bladder cancer. - Having conditions that cause chronic inflammation in the urethra, including: - Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including human papillomavirus (HPV), especially HPV type 16. - Frequent urinary tract infections (UTIs).
What are the symptoms of Urethral Cancer ?
Signs of urethral cancer include bleeding or trouble with urination. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by urethral cancer or by other conditions. There may be no signs or symptoms in the early stages. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Trouble starting the flow of urine. - Weak or interrupted ("stop-and-go") flow of urine. - Frequent urination, especially at night. - Incontinence. - Discharge from the urethra. - Bleeding from the urethra or blood in the urine. - A lump or thickness in the perineum or penis. - A painless lump or swelling in the groin.
How to diagnose Urethral Cancer ?
Tests that examine the urethra and bladder are used to detect (find) and diagnose urethral cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patient's health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Pelvic exam : An exam of the vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and rectum. A speculum is inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease. The doctor or nurse also inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and places the other hand over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas. - Digital rectal exam : An exam of the rectum. The doctor or nurse inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the lower part of the rectum to feel for lumps or anything else that seems unusual. - Urine cytology : A laboratory test in which a sample of urine is checked under a microscope for abnormal cells. - Urinalysis : A test to check the color of urine and its contents, such as sugar, protein, blood, and white blood cells. If white blood cells (a sign of infection) are found, a urine culture is usually done to find out what type of infection it is. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - Complete blood count (CBC): A procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - The number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - The amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - The portion of the blood sample made up of red blood cells. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the pelvis and abdomen, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Ureteroscopy : A procedure to look inside the ureter and renal pelvis to check for abnormal areas. A ureteroscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. The ureteroscope is inserted through the urethra into the bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis. A tool may be inserted through the ureteroscope to take tissue samples to be checked under a microscope for signs of disease. - Biopsy: The removal of cell or tissue samples from the urethra, bladder, and, sometimes, the prostate gland. The samples are viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.
What is the outlook for Urethral Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - Where the cancer formed in the urethra. - Whether the cancer has spread through the mucosa lining the urethra to nearby tissue, to lymph nodes, or to other parts of the body. - Whether the patient is a male or female. - The patient's general health. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Urethral Cancer ?
Key Points - After urethral cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the urethra or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - Urethral cancer is staged and treated based on the part of the urethra that is affected. - Distal urethral cancer - Proximal urethral cancer - Bladder and/or prostate cancer may occur at the same time as urethral cancer. After urethral cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the urethra or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the urethra or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following procedures may be used in the staging process: - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - CT scan (CAT scan) of the pelvis and abdomen : A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of the pelvis and abdomen, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of the urethra, nearby lymph nodes, and other soft tissue and bones in the pelvis. A substance called gadolinium is injected into the patient through a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Urethrography: A series of x-rays of the urethra. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. A dye is injected through the urethra into the bladder. The dye coats the bladder and urethra and x-rays are taken to see if the urethra is blocked and if cancer has spread to nearby tissue. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if urethral cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually urethral cancer cells. The disease is metastatic urethral cancer, not lung cancer. Urethral cancer is staged and treated based on the part of the urethra that is affected. Urethral cancer is staged and treated based on the part of the urethra that is affected and how deeply the tumor has spread into tissue around the urethra. Urethral cancer can be described as distal or proximal. Distal urethral cancer In distal urethral cancer, the cancer usually has not spread deeply into the tissue. In women, the part of the urethra that is closest to the outside of the body (about inch) is affected. In men, the part of the urethra that is in the penis is affected. Proximal urethral cancer Proximal urethral cancer affects the part of the urethra that is not the distal urethra. In women and men, proximal urethral cancer usually has spread deeply into tissue. Bladder and/or prostate cancer may occur at the same time as urethral cancer. In men, cancer that forms in the proximal urethra (the part of the urethra that passes through the prostate to the bladder) may occur at the same time as cancer of the bladder and/or prostate. Sometimes this occurs at diagnosis and sometimes it occurs later.
What are the treatments for Urethral Cancer ?
Key Points - There are different types of treatment for patients with urethral cancer. - Four types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Active surveillance - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with urethral cancer. Different types of treatments are available for patients with urethral cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery to remove the cancer is the most common treatment for cancer of the urethra. One of the following types of surgery may be done: - Open excision: Removal of the cancer by surgery. - Transurethral resection (TUR): Surgery to remove the cancer using a special tool inserted into the urethra. - Electroresection with fulguration: Surgery to remove the cancer by electric current. A lighted tool with a small wire loop on the end is used to remove the cancer or to burn the tumor away with high-energy electricity. - Laser surgery: A surgical procedure that uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) as a knife to make bloodless cuts in tissue or to remove or destroy tissue. - Lymph node dissection: Lymph nodes in the pelvis and groin may be removed. - Cystourethrectomy: Surgery to remove the bladder and the urethra. - Cystoprostatectomy: Surgery to remove the bladder and the prostate. - Anterior exenteration: Surgery to remove the urethra, the bladder, and the vagina. Plastic surgery may be done to rebuild the vagina. - Partial penectomy: Surgery to remove the part of the penis surrounding the urethra where cancer has spread. Plastic surgery may be done to rebuild the penis. - Radical penectomy: Surgery to remove the entire penis. Plastic surgery may be done to rebuild the penis. If the urethra is removed, the surgeon will make a new way for the urine to pass from the body. This is called urinary diversion. If the bladder is removed, the surgeon will make a new way for urine to be stored and passed from the body. The surgeon may use part of the small intestine to make a tube that passes urine through an opening (stoma). This is called an ostomy or urostomy. If a patient has an ostomy, a disposable bag to collect urine is worn under clothing. The surgeon may also use part of the small intestine to make a new storage pouch (continent reservoir) inside the body where the urine can collect. A tube (catheter) is then used to drain the urine through a stoma. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of cancer and where the cancer formed in the urethra. External and internal radiation therapy are used to treat urethral cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type of cancer and where the cancer formed in the urethra. Active surveillance Active surveillance is following a patient's condition without giving any treatment unless there are changes in test results. It is used to find early signs that the condition is getting worse. In active surveillance, patients are given certain exams and tests, including biopsies, on a regular schedule. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Urethral Cancer Distal Urethral Cancer Treatment of abnormal cells in the mucosa (inside lining of the urethra that have not become cancer, may include surgery to remove the tumor (open excision or transurethral resection), electroresection with fulguration, or laser surgery. Treatment of distal urethral cancer is different for men and women. For women, treatment may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor (transurethral resection), electroresection and fulguration, or laser surgery for tumors that have not spread deeply into tissue. - Brachytherapy and/or external radiation therapy for tumors that have not spread deeply into tissue. - Surgery to remove the tumor (anterior exenteration) for tumors that have spread deeply into tissue. Sometimes nearby lymph nodes are also removed (lymph node dissection). Radiation therapy may be given before surgery. For men, treatment may include the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor (transurethral resection), electroresection and fulguration, or laser surgery for tumors that have not spread deeply into tissue. - Surgery to remove part of the penis (partial penectomy) for tumors that are near the tip of the penis. Sometimes nearby lymph nodes are also removed (lymph node dissection). - Surgery to remove part of the urethra for tumors that are in the distal urethra but not at the tip of the penis and have not spread deeply into tissue. Sometimes nearby lymph nodes are also removed (lymph node dissection). - Surgery to remove the penis (radical penectomy) for tumors that have spread deeply into tissue. Sometimes nearby lymph nodes are also removed (lymph node dissection). - Radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy. - Chemotherapy given together with radiation therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with distal urethral cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Proximal Urethral Cancer Treatment of proximal urethral cancer or urethral cancer that affects the entire urethra is different for men and women. For women, treatment may include the following: - Radiation therapy and/or surgery (open excision, transurethral resection) for tumors that are of an inch or smaller. - Radiation therapy followed by surgery (anterior exenteration with lymph node dissection and urinary diversion). For men, treatment may include the following: - Radiation therapy or radiation therapy and chemotherapy, followed by surgery (cystoprostatectomy, penectomy, lymph node dissection, and urinary diversion). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with proximal urethral cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Urethral Cancer that Forms with Invasive Bladder Cancer Treatment of urethral cancer that forms at the same time as invasive bladder cancer may include the following: - Surgery (cystourethrectomy in women, or urethrectomy and cystoprostatectomy in men). If the urethra is not removed during surgery to remove the bladder, treatment may include the following: - Active surveillance. Samples of cells are taken from inside the urethra and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with urethral cancer associated with invasive bladder cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Metastatic or Recurrent Urethral Cancer Treatment of urethral cancer that has metastasized (spread to other parts of the body) is usually chemotherapy. Treatment of recurrent urethral cancer may include one or more of the following: - Surgery to remove the tumor. Sometimes nearby lymph nodes are also removed (lymph node dissection). - Radiation therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent urethral cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Urethral Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Vulvar Cancer ?
 Vulvar cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the vulva. - Having vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia or HPV infection can affect the risk of vulvar cancer. - Signs of vulvar cancer include bleeding or itching. - Tests that examine the vulva are used to detect (find) and diagnose vulvar cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Vulvar cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the vulva. Vulvar cancer forms in a woman's external genitalia. The vulva includes: - Inner and outer lips of the vagina. - Clitoris (sensitive tissue between the lips). - Opening of the vagina and its glands. - Mons pubis (the rounded area in front of the pubic bones that becomes covered with hair at puberty). - Perineum (the area between the vulva and the anus). Vulvar cancer most often affects the outer vaginal lips. Less often, cancer affects the inner vaginal lips, clitoris, or vaginal glands. Vulvar cancer usually forms slowly over a number of years. Abnormal cells can grow on the surface of the vulvar skin for a long time. This condition is called vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). Because it is possible for VIN to become vulvar cancer, it is very important to get treatment. Having vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia or HPV infection can affect the risk of vulvar cancer. Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for vulvar cancer include the following: - Having vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). - Having human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. - Having a history of genital warts. Other possible risk factors include the following: - Having many sexual partners. - Having first sexual intercourse at a young age. - Having a history of abnormal Pap tests (Pap smears). Recurrent Vulvar Cancer Recurrent vulvar cancer is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated. The cancer may come back in the vulva or in other parts of the body.
What are the symptoms of Vulvar Cancer ?
Signs of vulvar cancer include bleeding or itching. Vulvar cancer often does not cause early signs or symptoms. Signs and symptoms may be caused by vulvar cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - A lump or growth on the vulva. - Changes in the vulvar skin, such as color changes or growths that look like a wart or ulcer. - Itching in the vulvar area, that does not go away. - Bleeding not related to menstruation (periods). - Tenderness in the vulvar area.
How to diagnose Vulvar Cancer ?
Tests that examine the vulva are used to detect (find) and diagnose vulvar cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking the vulva for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Biopsy : The removal of samples of cells or tissues from the vulva so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.
What is the outlook for Vulvar Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer. - The patient's age and general health. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Vulvar Cancer ?
 After vulvar cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the vulva or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - In vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), abnormal cells are found on the surface of the vulvar skin. - The following stages are used for vulvar cancer: - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV After vulvar cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the vulva or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the vulva or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - Pelvic exam : An exam of the vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and rectum. A speculum is inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease. A Pap test of the cervix is usually done. The doctor or nurse also inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and places the other hand over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas. - Colposcopy : A procedure in which a colposcope (a lighted, magnifying instrument) is used to check the vagina and cervix for abnormal areas. Tissue samples may be taken using a curette (spoon-shaped instrument) or a brush and checked under a microscope for signs of disease. - Cystoscopy : A procedure to look inside the bladder and urethra to check for abnormal areas. A cystoscope is inserted through the urethra into the bladder. A cystoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. - Proctoscopy : A procedure to look inside the rectum and anus to check for abnormal areas. A proctoscope is inserted into the anus and rectum. A proctoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. - X-rays : An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. To stage vulvar cancer, x-rays may be taken of the organs and bones inside the chest, and the pelvic bones. - Intravenous pyelogram (IVP): A series of x-rays of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder to find out if cancer has spread to these organs. A contrast dye is injected into a vein. As the contrast dye moves through the kidneys, ureters and bladder, x-rays are taken to see if there are any blockages. This procedure is also called intravenous urography. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - Sentinel lymph node biopsy : The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. Sentinel lymph node biopsy may be done during surgery to remove the tumor for early-stage vulvar cancer. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if vulvar cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually vulvar cancer cells. The disease is metastatic vulvar cancer, not lung cancer. In vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), abnormal cells are found on the surface of the vulvar skin. These abnormal cells are not cancer. Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) may become cancer and spread into nearby tissue. VIN is sometimes called stage 0 or carcinoma in situ. The following stages are used for vulvar cancer: Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed. The tumor is found only in the vulva or perineum (area between the rectum and the vagina). Stage I is divided into stages IA and IB. - In stage IA, the tumor is 2 centimeters or smaller and has spread 1 millimeter or less into the tissue of the vulva. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. - In stage IB, the tumor is larger than 2 centimeters or has spread more than 1 millimeter into the tissue of the vulva. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. Stage II In stage II, the tumor is any size and has spread into the lower part of the urethra, the lower part of the vagina, or the anus. Cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes. Stage III In stage III, the tumor is any size and may have spread into the lower part of the urethra, the lower part of the vagina, or the anus. Cancer has spread to one or more nearby lymph nodes. Stage III is divided into stages IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC. - In stage IIIA, cancer is found in 1 or 2 lymph nodes that are smaller than 5 millimeters or in one lymph node that is 5 millimeters or larger. - In stage IIIB, cancer is found in 2 or more lymph nodes that are 5 millimeters or larger, or in 3 or more lymph nodes that are smaller than 5 millimeters. - In stage IIIC, cancer is found in lymph nodes and has spread to the outside surface of the lymph nodes. Stage IV In stage IV, the tumor has spread into the upper part of the urethra, the upper part of the vagina, or to other parts of the body. Stage IV is divided into stages IVA and IVB. - In stage IVA: - cancer has spread into the lining of the upper urethra, the upper vagina, the bladder, or the rectum, or has attached to the pelvic bone; or - cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes and the lymph nodes are not moveable or have formed an ulcer. - In stage IVB, cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the pelvis or to other parts of the body.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Vulvar Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What are the treatments for Vulvar Cancer ?
 There are different types of treatment for patients with vulvar cancer. - Four types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Biologic therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with vulvar cancer. Different types of treatments are available for patients with vulvar cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery is the most common treatment for vulvar cancer. The goal of surgery is to remove all the cancer without any loss of the woman's sexual function. One of the following types of surgery may be done: - Laser surgery: A surgical procedure that uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) as a knife to make bloodless cuts in tissue or to remove a surface lesion such as a tumor. - Wide local excision: A surgical procedure to remove the cancer and some of the normal tissue around the cancer. - Radical local excision: A surgical procedure to remove the cancer and a large amount of normal tissue around it. Nearby lymph nodes in the groin may also be removed. - Ultrasound surgical aspiration (USA): A surgical procedure to break the tumor up into small pieces using very fine vibrations. The small pieces of tumor are washed away and removed by suction. This procedure causes less damage to nearby tissue. - Vulvectomy: A surgical procedure to remove part or all of the vulva: - Skinning vulvectomy: The top layer of vulvar skin where the cancer is found is removed. Skin grafts from other parts of the body may be needed to cover the area where the skin was removed. - Modified radical vulvectomy: Surgery to remove part of the vulva. Nearby lymph nodes may also be removed. - Radical vulvectomy: Surgery to remove the entire vulva. Nearby lymph nodes are also removed. - Pelvic exenteration: A surgical procedure to remove the lower colon, rectum, and bladder. The cervix, vagina, ovaries, and nearby lymph nodes are also removed. Artificial openings (stoma) are made for urine and stool to flow from the body into a collection bag. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may have chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External and internal radiation therapy are used to treat vulvar cancer, and external radiation therapy may also be used as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, a body cavity such as the abdomen, or onto the skin, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Topical chemotherapy for vulvar cancer may be applied to the skin in a cream or lotion. See Drugs Approved to Treat Vulvar Cancer for more information. Biologic therapy Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patients immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the bodys natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or immunotherapy. Imiquimod is a biologic therapy that may be used to treat vulvar lesions and is applied to the skin in a cream. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. It is important to have regular follow-up exams to check for recurrent vulvar cancer. Treatment Options by Stage Vulvar Intraepithelial Neoplasia (VIN): Treatment of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) may include the following: - Removal of single lesions or wide local excision. - Laser surgery. - Ultrasound surgical aspiration. - Skinning vulvectomy with or without a skin graft. - Biologic therapy with topical imiquimod. - Stage I Vulvar Cancer: Treatment of stage I vulvar cancer may include the following: - Wide local excision for lesions that are less than 1 millimeter deep.. - Radical local excision and removal of nearby lymph nodes. - Radical local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy. If cancer is found in the sentinel lymph node, nearby lymph nodes are also removed. - Radiation therapy for patients who cannot have surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I vulvar cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . - Stage II Vulvar Cancer: Treatment of stage II vulvar cancer may include the following: - Radical local excision and removal of nearby lymph nodes. - Modified radical vulvectomy or radical vulvectomy for large tumors. Nearby lymph nodes may be removed. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - Radical local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy. If cancer is found in the sentinel lymph node, nearby lymph nodes are also removed. - Radiation therapy for patients who cannot have surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II vulvar cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . - Stage III Vulvar Cancer: Treatment of stage III vulvar cancer may include the following: - Modified radical vulvectomy or radical vulvectomy. Nearby lymph nodes may be removed. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - Radiation therapy or chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by surgery. - Radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy for patients who cannot have surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III vulvar cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . - Stage IV Vulvar Cancer: Treatment of stage IVA vulvar cancer may include the following: - Radical vulvectomy and pelvic exenteration. - Radical vulvectomy followed by radiation therapy. - Radiation therapy or chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by surgery. - Radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy for patients who cannot have surgery. There is no standard treatment for stage IVB vulvar cancer. Treatment may include a clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IVB vulvar cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Treatment Options for Recurrent Vulvar Cancer Treatment of recurrent vulvar cancer may include the following: - Wide local excision with or without radiation therapy to treat cancer that has come back in the same area. - Radical vulvectomy and pelvic exenteration to treat cancer that has come back in the same area. - Chemotherapy and radiation therapy with or without surgery. - Radiation therapy followed by surgery or chemotherapy. - Radiation therapy as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. - A clinical trial of a new treatment. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent vulvar cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
What is are Colorectal Cancer ?
Colorectal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the colon or the rectum. - Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death from cancer in the United States. Colorectal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the colon or the rectum. The colon is part of the body's digestive system. The digestive system removes and processes nutrients (vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and water) from foods and helps pass waste material out of the body. The digestive system is made up of the mouth, throat, esophagus, stomach, and the small and large intestines. The colon (large bowel) is the first part of the large intestine and is about 5 feet long. Together, the rectum and anal canal make up the last part of the large intestine and are 6 to 8 inches long. The anal canal ends at the anus (the opening of the large intestine to the outside of the body). Cancer that begins in the colon is called colon cancer, and cancer that begins in the rectum is called rectal cancer. Cancer that affects either of these organs may also be called colorectal cancer. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about colorectal cancer: - Colorectal Cancer Screening - Colon Cancer Treatment - Rectal Cancer Treatment - Genetics of Colorectal Cancer Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death from cancer in the United States. The number of new colorectal cancer cases and the number of deaths from colorectal cancer are both decreasing a little bit each year. However, in adults younger than 50 years, the number of new colorectal cancer cases has slowly increased since 1998. The number of new colorectal cancers and deaths from colorectal cancer are higher in African Americans than in other races. Finding and treating colorectal cancer early may prevent death from colorectal cancer. Screening tests may be used to help find colorectal cancer.
How to prevent Colorectal Cancer ?
Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. - The following risk factors increase the risk of colorectal cancer: - Age - Family history of colorectal cancer - Personal history - Inherited risk - Alcohol - Cigarette smoking - Obesity - The following protective factors decrease the risk of colorectal cancer: - Physical activity - Aspirin - Combination hormone replacement therapy - Polyp removal - It is not clear if the following affect the risk of colorectal cancer: - Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) other than aspirin - Calcium - Diet - The following factors do not affect the risk of colorectal cancer: - Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only - Statins - Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - New ways to prevent colorectal cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. The following risk factors increase the risk of colorectal cancer: Age The risk of colorectal cancer increases after age 50. Most cases of colorectal cancer are diagnosed after age 50. Family history of colorectal cancer Having a parent, brother, sister, or child with colorectal cancer doubles a person's risk of colorectal cancer. Personal history Having a personal history of the following conditions increases the risk of colorectal cancer: - Previous colorectal cancer. - High-risk adenomas (colorectal polyps that are 1 centimeter or larger in size or that have cells that look abnormal under a microscope). - Ovarian cancer. - Inflammatory bowel disease (such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease). Inherited risk The risk of colorectal cancer is increased when certain gene changes linked to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC or Lynch Syndrome) are inherited. Alcohol Drinking 3 or more alcoholic beverages per day increases the risk of colorectal cancer. Drinking alcohol is also linked to the risk of forming large colorectal adenomas (benign tumors). Cigarette smoking Cigarette smoking is linked to an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer. Smoking cigarettes is also linked to an increased risk of forming colorectal adenomas. Cigarette smokers who have had surgery to remove colorectal adenomas are at an increased risk for the adenomas to recur (come back). Obesity Obesity is linked to an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer. The following protective factors decrease the risk of colorectal cancer: Physical activity A lifestyle that includes regular physical activity is linked to a decreased risk of colorectal cancer. Aspirin Studies have shown that taking aspirin lowers the risk of colorectal cancer and the risk of death from colorectal cancer. The decrease in risk begins 10 to 20 years after patients start taking aspirin. The possible harms of aspirin use (100 mg or less) daily or every other day include an increased risk of stroke and bleeding in the stomach and intestines. These risks may be greater among the elderly, men, and those with conditions linked to a higher than normal risk of bleeding. Combination hormone replacement therapy Studies have shown that combination hormone replacement therapy (HRT) that includes both estrogen and progestin lowers the risk of invasive colorectal cancer in postmenopausal women. However, in women who take combination HRT and do develop colorectal cancer, the cancer is more likely to be advanced when it is diagnosed and the risk of dying from colorectal cancer is not decreased. The possible harms of combination HRT include an increased risk of having: - Breast cancer. - Heart disease. - Blood clots. Polyp removal Most colorectal polyps are adenomas, which may develop into cancer. Removing colorectal polyps that are larger than 1 centimeter (pea-sized) may lower the risk of colorectal cancer. It is not known if removing smaller polyps lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. The possible harms of polyp removal during colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy include a tear in the wall of the colon and bleeding. It is not clear if the following affect the risk of colorectal cancer: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) other than aspirin It is not known if the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs (such as sulindac, celecoxib, naproxen, and ibuprofen) lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Studies have shown that taking the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug celecoxib reduces the risk of colorectal adenomas (benign tumors) coming back after they have been removed. It is not clear if this results in a lower risk of colorectal cancer. Taking sulindac or celecoxib has been shown to reduce the number and size of polyps that form in the colon and rectum of people with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). It is not clear if this results in a lower risk of colorectal cancer. The possible harms of NSAIDs include: - Kidney problems. - Bleeding in the stomach, intestines, or brain. - Heart problems such as heart attack and congestive heart failure. Calcium It is not known if taking calcium supplements lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Diet It is not known if a diet low in fat and meat and high in fiber, fruits, and vegetables lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Some studies have shown that a diet high in fat, proteins, calories, and meat increases the risk of colorectal cancer, but other studies have not. The following factors do not affect the risk of colorectal cancer: Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only does not lower the risk of having invasive colorectal cancer or the risk of dying from colorectal cancer. Statins Studies have shown that taking statins (drugs that lower cholesterol) does not increase or decrease the risk of colorectal cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include exercising more or quitting smoking or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. New ways to prevent colorectal cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials can be found in the Clinical Trials section of the NCI website. Check NCI's list of cancer clinical trials for colon cancer prevention trials or rectal cancer prevention trials that are now accepting patients.
Who is at risk for Colorectal Cancer? ?
Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. - The following risk factors increase the risk of colorectal cancer: - Age - Family history of colorectal cancer - Personal history - Inherited risk - Alcohol - Cigarette smoking - Obesity - The following protective factors decrease the risk of colorectal cancer: - Physical activity - Aspirin - Combination hormone replacement therapy - Polyp removal - It is not clear if the following affect the risk of colorectal cancer: - Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) other than aspirin - Calcium - Diet - The following factors do not affect the risk of colorectal cancer: - Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only - Statins - Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - New ways to prevent colorectal cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. The following risk factors increase the risk of colorectal cancer: Age The risk of colorectal cancer increases after age 50. Most cases of colorectal cancer are diagnosed after age 50. Family history of colorectal cancer Having a parent, brother, sister, or child with colorectal cancer doubles a person's risk of colorectal cancer. Personal history Having a personal history of the following conditions increases the risk of colorectal cancer: - Previous colorectal cancer. - High-risk adenomas (colorectal polyps that are 1 centimeter or larger in size or that have cells that look abnormal under a microscope). - Ovarian cancer. - Inflammatory bowel disease (such as ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease). Inherited risk The risk of colorectal cancer is increased when certain gene changes linked to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC or Lynch Syndrome) are inherited. Alcohol Drinking 3 or more alcoholic beverages per day increases the risk of colorectal cancer. Drinking alcohol is also linked to the risk of forming large colorectal adenomas (benign tumors). Cigarette smoking Cigarette smoking is linked to an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer. Smoking cigarettes is also linked to an increased risk of forming colorectal adenomas. Cigarette smokers who have had surgery to remove colorectal adenomas are at an increased risk for the adenomas to recur (come back). Obesity Obesity is linked to an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer. It is not clear if the following affect the risk of colorectal cancer: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) other than aspirin It is not known if the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs (such as sulindac, celecoxib, naproxen, and ibuprofen) lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Studies have shown that taking the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug celecoxib reduces the risk of colorectal adenomas (benign tumors) coming back after they have been removed. It is not clear if this results in a lower risk of colorectal cancer. Taking sulindac or celecoxib has been shown to reduce the number and size of polyps that form in the colon and rectum of people with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). It is not clear if this results in a lower risk of colorectal cancer. The possible harms of NSAIDs include: - Kidney problems. - Bleeding in the stomach, intestines, or brain. - Heart problems such as heart attack and congestive heart failure. Calcium It is not known if taking calcium supplements lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Diet It is not known if a diet low in fat and meat and high in fiber, fruits, and vegetables lowers the risk of colorectal cancer. Some studies have shown that a diet high in fat, proteins, calories, and meat increases the risk of colorectal cancer, but other studies have not. The following factors do not affect the risk of colorectal cancer: Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only Hormone replacement therapy with estrogen only does not lower the risk of having invasive colorectal cancer or the risk of dying from colorectal cancer. Statins Studies have shown that taking statins (drugs that lower cholesterol) does not increase or decrease the risk of colorectal cancer.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Colorectal Cancer ?
Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include exercising more or quitting smoking or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. New ways to prevent colorectal cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials can be found in the Clinical Trials section of the NCI website. Check NCI's list of cancer clinical trials for colon cancer prevention trials or rectal cancer prevention trials that are now accepting patients.
What is are Colon Cancer ?
Colon cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the colon. - Health history affects the risk of developing colon cancer. - Signs of colon cancer include blood in the stool or a change in bowel habits. - Tests that examine the colon and rectum are used to detect (find) and diagnose colon cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Colon cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the colon. The colon is part of the bodys digestive system. The digestive system removes and processes nutrients (vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and water) from foods and helps pass waste material out of the body. The digestive system is made up of the esophagus, stomach, and the small and large intestines. The colon (large bowel) is the first part of the large intestine and is about 5 feet long. Together, the rectum and anal canal make up the last part of the large intestine and are about 6-8 inches long. The anal canal ends at the anus (the opening of the large intestine to the outside of the body). Gastrointestinal stromal tumors can occur in the colon. See the PDQ summary on Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors Treatment for more information. See the PDQ summary about Unusual Cancers of Childhood Treatment for information about colorectal cancer in children.
Who is at risk for Colon Cancer? ?
Health history affects the risk of developing colon cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk to your doctor if you think you may be at risk for colorectal cancer. Risk factors for colorectal cancer include the following: - Having a family history of colon or rectal cancer in a first-degree relative (parent, sibling, or child). - Having a personal history of cancer of the colon, rectum, or ovary. - Having a personal history of high-risk adenomas (colorectal polyps that are 1 centimeter or larger in size or that have cells that look abnormal under a microscope). - Having inherited changes in certain genes that increase the risk of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer). - Having a personal history of chronic ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease for 8 years or more. - Having three or more alcoholic drinks per day. - Smoking cigarettes. - Being black. - Being obese. Older age is a main risk factor for most cancers. The chance of getting cancer increases as you get older.
What are the symptoms of Colon Cancer ?
Signs of colon cancer include blood in the stool or a change in bowel habits. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by colon cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - A change in bowel habits. - Blood (either bright red or very dark) in the stool. - Diarrhea, constipation, or feeling that the bowel does not empty all the way. - Stools that are narrower than usual. - Frequent gas pains, bloating, fullness, or cramps. - Weight loss for no known reason. - Feeling very tired. - Vomiting.
How to diagnose Colon Cancer ?
Tests that examine the colon and rectum are used to detect (find) and diagnose colon cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Digital rectal exam : An exam of the rectum. The doctor or nurse inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or anything else that seems unusual. - Fecal occult blood test (FOBT): A test to check stool (solid waste) for blood that can only be seen with a microscope. A small sample of stool is placed on a special card or in a special container and returned to the doctor or laboratory for testing. Blood in the stool may be a sign of polyps, cancer, or other conditions. There are two types of FOBTs: - Guaiac FOBT : The sample of stool on the special card is tested with a chemical. If there is blood in the stool, the special card changes color. - Immunochemical FOBT : A liquid is added to the stool sample. This mixture is injected into a machine that contains antibodies that can detect blood in the stool. If there is blood in the stool, a line appears in a window in the machine. This test is also called fecal immunochemical test or FIT. - Barium enema : A series of x-rays of the lower gastrointestinal tract. A liquid that contains barium (a silver-white metallic compound) is put into the rectum. The barium coats the lower gastrointestinal tract and x-rays are taken. This procedure is also called a lower GI series. - Sigmoidoscopy : A procedure to look inside the rectum and sigmoid (lower) colon for polyps (small areas of bulging tissue), other abnormal areas, or cancer. A sigmoidoscope is inserted through the rectum into the sigmoid colon. A sigmoidoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove polyps or tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. - Colonoscopy : A procedure to look inside the rectum and colon for polyps, abnormal areas, or cancer. A colonoscope is inserted through the rectum into the colon. A colonoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove polyps or tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. - Virtual colonoscopy : A procedure that uses a series of x-rays called computed tomography to make a series of pictures of the colon. A computer puts the pictures together to create detailed images that may show polyps and anything else that seems unusual on the inside surface of the colon. This test is also called colonography or CT colonography. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer.
What is the outlook for Colon Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (whether the cancer is in the inner lining of the colon only or has spread through the colon wall, or has spread to lymph nodes or other places in the body). - Whether the cancer has blocked or made a hole in the colon. - Whether there are any cancer cells left after surgery. - Whether the cancer has recurred. - The patients general health. The prognosis also depends on the blood levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) before treatment begins. CEA is a substance in the blood that may be increased when cancer is present.
What are the stages of Colon Cancer ?
After colon cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the colon or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for colon cancer: - Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV After colon cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the colon or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the colon or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the abdomen or chest, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the colon. A substance called gadolinium is injected into the patient through a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - PET scan (positron emission tomography scan): A procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. A small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. The PET scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. Malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - Surgery : A procedure to remove the tumor and see how far it has spread through the colon. - Lymph node biopsy : The removal of all or part of a lymph node. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. - Complete blood count (CBC): A procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - The number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - The amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - The portion of the blood sample made up of red blood cells. - Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) assay : A test that measures the level of CEA in the blood. CEA is released into the bloodstream from both cancer cells and normal cells. When found in higher than normal amounts, it can be a sign of colon cancer or other conditions. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if colon cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually colon cancer cells. The disease is metastatic colon cancer, not lung cancer. The following stages are used for colon cancer: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the mucosa (innermost layer) of the colon wall. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed in the mucosa (innermost layer) of the colon wall and has spread to the submucosa (layer of tissue under the mucosa). Cancer may have spread to the muscle layer of the colon wall. Stage II Stage II colon cancer is divided into stage IIA, stage IIB, and stage IIC. - Stage IIA: Cancer has spread through the muscle layer of the colon wall to the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall. - Stage IIB: Cancer has spread through the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall but has not spread to nearby organs. - Stage IIC: Cancer has spread through the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall to nearby organs. Stage III Stage III colon cancer is divided into stage IIIA, stage IIIB, and stage IIIC. In stage IIIA: - Cancer has spread through the mucosa (innermost layer) of the colon wall to the submucosa (layer of tissue under the mucosa) and may have spread to the muscle layer of the colon wall. Cancer has spread to at least one but not more than 3 nearby lymph nodes or cancer cells have formed in tissues near the lymph nodes; or - Cancer has spread through the mucosa (innermost layer) of the colon wall to the submucosa (layer of tissue under the mucosa). Cancer has spread to at least 4 but not more than 6 nearby lymph nodes. In stage IIIB: - Cancer has spread through the muscle layer of the colon wall to the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall or has spread through the serosa but not to nearby organs. Cancer has spread to at least one but not more than 3 nearby lymph nodes or cancer cells have formed in tissues near the lymph nodes; or - Cancer has spread to the muscle layer of the colon wall or to the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall. Cancer has spread to at least 4 but not more than 6 nearby lymph nodes; or - Cancer has spread through the mucosa (innermost layer) of the colon wall to the submucosa (layer of tissue under the mucosa) and may have spread to the muscle layer of the colon wall. Cancer has spread to 7 or more nearby lymph nodes. In stage IIIC: - Cancer has spread through the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall but has not spread to nearby organs. Cancer has spread to at least 4 but not more than 6 nearby lymph nodes; or - Cancer has spread through the muscle layer of the colon wall to the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall or has spread through the serosa but has not spread to nearby organs. Cancer has spread to 7 or more nearby lymph nodes; or - Cancer has spread through the serosa (outermost layer) of the colon wall and has spread to nearby organs. Cancer has spread to one or more nearby lymph nodes or cancer cells have formed in tissues near the lymph nodes. Stage IV Stage IV colon cancer is divided into stage IVA and stage IVB. - Stage IVA: Cancer may have spread through the colon wall and may have spread to nearby organs or lymph nodes. Cancer has spread to one organ that is not near the colon, such as the liver, lung, or ovary, or to a distant lymph node. - Stage IVB: Cancer may have spread through the colon wall and may have spread to nearby organs or lymph nodes. Cancer has spread to more than one organ that is not near the colon or into the lining of the abdominal wall.
What are the treatments for Colon Cancer ?
There are different types of treatment for patients with colon cancer. - Six types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiofrequency ablation - Cryosurgery - Chemotherapy - Radiation therapy - Targeted therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with colon cancer. Different types of treatment are available for patients with colon cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Six types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery (removing the cancer in an operation) is the most common treatment for all stages of colon cancer. A doctor may remove the cancer using one of the following types of surgery: - Local excision: If the cancer is found at a very early stage, the doctor may remove it without cutting through the abdominal wall. Instead, the doctor may put a tube with a cutting tool through the rectum into the colon and cut the cancer out. This is called a local excision. If the cancer is found in a polyp (a small bulging area of tissue), the operation is called a polypectomy. - Resection of the colon with anastomosis: If the cancer is larger, the doctor will perform a partial colectomy (removing the cancer and a small amount of healthy tissue around it). The doctor may then perform an anastomosis (sewing the healthy parts of the colon together). The doctor will also usually remove lymph nodes near the colon and examine them under a microscope to see whether they contain cancer. - Resection of the colon with colostomy: If the doctor is not able to sew the 2 ends of the colon back together, a stoma (an opening) is made on the outside of the body for waste to pass through. This procedure is called a colostomy. A bag is placed around the stoma to collect the waste. Sometimes the colostomy is needed only until the lower colon has healed, and then it can be reversed. If the doctor needs to remove the entire lower colon, however, the colostomy may be permanent. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the operation, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiofrequency ablation Radiofrequency ablation is the use of a special probe with tiny electrodes that kill cancer cells. Sometimes the probe is inserted directly through the skin and only local anesthesia is needed. In other cases, the probe is inserted through an incision in the abdomen. This is done in the hospital with general anesthesia. Cryosurgery Cryosurgery is a treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). Chemoembolization of the hepatic artery may be used to treat cancer that has spread to the liver. This involves blocking the hepatic artery (the main artery that supplies blood to the liver) and injecting anticancer drugs between the blockage and the liver. The livers arteries then deliver the drugs throughout the liver. Only a small amount of the drug reaches other parts of the body. The blockage may be temporary or permanent, depending on what is used to block the artery. The liver continues to receive some blood from the hepatic portal vein, which carries blood from the stomach and intestine. The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. See Drugs Approved for Colon and Rectal Cancer for more information. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. Targeted therapy Targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. Types of targeted therapies used in the treatment of colon cancer include the following: - Monoclonal antibodies: Monoclonal antibodies are made in the laboratory from a single type of immune system cell. These antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. The antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. Monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. They may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. - Bevacizumab and ramucirumab are types of monoclonal antibodies that bind to a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). This may prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. - Cetuximab and panitumumab are types of monoclonal antibodies that bind to a protein called epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) on the surface of some types of cancer cells. This may stop cancer cells from growing and dividing. - Angiogenesis inhibitors: Angiogenesis inhibitors stop the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. - Ziv-aflibercept is a vascular endothelial growth factor trap that blocks an enzyme needed for the growth of new blood vessels in tumors. - Regorafenib is used to treat colorectal cancer that has spread to other parts of the body and has not gotten better with other treatment. It blocks the action of certain proteins, including vascular endothelial growth factor. This may help keep cancer cells from growing and may kill them. It may also prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to grow. See Drugs Approved for Colon and Rectal Cancer for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Colon Cancer Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) Treatment of stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) may include the following types of surgery: - Local excision or simple polypectomy. - Resection and anastomosis. This is done when the tumor is too large to remove by local excision. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage 0 colon cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage I Colon Cancer Treatment of stage I colon cancer usually includes the following: - Resection and anastomosis. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I colon cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage II Colon Cancer Treatment of stage II colon cancer may include the following: - Resection and anastomosis. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II colon cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Colon Cancer Treatment of stage III colon cancer may include the following: - Resection and anastomosis which may be followed by chemotherapy. - Clinical trials of new chemotherapy regimens after surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III colon cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage IV and Recurrent Colon Cancer Treatment of stage IV and recurrent colon cancer may include the following: - Local excision for tumors that have recurred. - Resection with or without anastomosis. - Surgery to remove parts of other organs, such as the liver, lungs, and ovaries, where the cancer may have recurred or spread. Treatment of cancer that has spread to the liver may also include the following: - Chemotherapy given before surgery to shrink the tumor, after surgery, or both before and after. - Radiofrequency ablation or cryosurgery, for patients who cannot have surgery. - Chemoembolization of the hepatic artery. - Radiation therapy or chemotherapy may be offered to some patients as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. - Chemotherapy and/or targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody or an angiogenesis inhibitor. - Clinical trials of chemotherapy and/or targeted therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV colon cancer and recurrent colon cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Colon Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Prostate Cancer ?
Prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. - Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer among men in the United States. Prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. The prostate is just below the bladder (the organ that collects and empties urine) and in front of the rectum (the lower part of the intestine). It is about the size of a walnut and surrounds part of the urethra (the tube that empties urine from the bladder). The prostate gland produces fluid that makes up part of the semen. As men age, the prostate may get bigger. A bigger prostate may block the flow of urine from the bladder and cause problems with sexual function. This condition is called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). BPH is not cancer, but surgery may be needed to correct it. The symptoms of BPH or of other problems in the prostate may be like symptoms of prostate cancer.
Who is at risk for Prostate Cancer? ?
Prostate cancer is most common in older men. In the U.S., about one out of five men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer. Most men diagnosed with prostate cancer do not die of it. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about prostate cancer: - Prostate Cancer Screening - Prostate Cancer Treatment
How to prevent Prostate Cancer ?
Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. - The following risk factors may increase the risk of prostate cancer: - Age - Family history of prostate cancer - Race - Hormones - Vitamin E - Folic acid - Dairy and calcium - The following protective factors may decrease the risk of prostate cancer: - Folate - Finasteride and Dutasteride - The following have been proven not to affect the risk of prostate cancer, or their effects on prostate cancer risk are not known: - Selenium and vitamin E - Diet - Multivitamins - Lycopene - Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - New ways to prevent prostate cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. The following risk factors may increase the risk of prostate cancer: Age Prostate cancer is rare in men younger than 50 years of age. The chance of developing prostate cancer increases as men get older. Family history of prostate cancer A man whose father, brother, or son has had prostate cancer has a higher-than-average risk of prostate cancer. Race Prostate cancer occurs more often in African-American men than in white men. African-American men with prostate cancer are more likely to die from the disease than white men with prostate cancer. Hormones The prostate needs male hormones to work the way it should. The main male sex hormone is testosterone. Testosterone helps the body develop and maintain male sex characteristics. Testosterone is changed into dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by an enzyme in the body. DHT is important for normal prostate growth but can also cause the prostate to get bigger and may play a part in the development of prostate cancer. Vitamin E The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) found that vitamin E taken alone increased the risk of prostate cancer. The risk continued even after the men stopped taking vitamin E. Folic acid Folate is a kind of vitamin B that occurs naturally in some foods, such as green vegetables, beans and orange juice. Folic acid is a man-made form of folate that is found in vitamin supplements and fortified foods, such as whole-grain breads and cereals. A 10-year study showed that the risk of prostate cancer was increased in men who took 1 milligram (mg) supplements of folic acid. However, the risk of prostate cancer was lower in men who had enough folate in their diets. Dairy and calcium A diet high in dairy foods and calcium may cause a small increase in the risk of prostate cancer. The following protective factors may decrease the risk of prostate cancer: Folate Folate is a kind of vitamin B that occurs naturally in some foods, such as green vegetables, beans and orange juice. Folic acid is a man-made form of folate that is found in vitamin supplements and fortified foods, such as whole-grain breads and cereals. A 10-year study showed that the risk of prostate cancer was lower in men who had enough folate in their diets. However, the risk of prostate cancer was increased in men who took 1 milligram (mg) supplements of folic acid. Finasteride and Dutasteride Finasteride and dutasteride are drugs used to lower the amount of male sex hormones made by the body. These drugs block the enzyme that changes testosterone into dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Higher than normal levels of DHT may play a part in developing prostate cancer. Taking finasteride or dutasteride has been shown to lower the risk for prostate cancer, but it is not known if these drugs lower the risk of death from prostate cancer. The Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) studied whether the drug finasteride can prevent prostate cancer in healthy men 55 years of age and older. This prevention study showed there were fewer prostate cancers in the group of men that took finasteride compared with the group of men that did not. Also, the men who took finasteride who did have prostate cancer had more aggressive tumors. The number of deaths from prostate cancer was the same in both groups. Men who took finasteride reported more side effects compared with the group of men that did not, including erectile dysfunction, loss of desire for sex, and enlarged breasts. The Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events Trial (REDUCE) studied whether the drug dutasteride can prevent prostate cancer in men aged 50 to 75 years at higher risk for the disease. This prevention study showed there were fewer prostate cancers in the group of men who took dutasteride compared with the group of men that did not. The number of less aggressive prostate cancers was lower, but the number of more aggressive prostate cancers was not. Men who took dutasteride reported more side effects than men who did not, including erectile dysfunction, loss of desire for sex, less semen, and gynecomastia (enlarged breasts). The following have been proven not to affect the risk of prostate cancer, or their effects on prostate cancer risk are not known: Selenium and vitamin E The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) studied whether taking vitamin E and selenium (a mineral) will prevent prostate cancer. The selenium and vitamin E were taken separately or together by healthy men 55 years of age and older (50 years of age and older for African-American men). The study showed that taking selenium alone or selenium and vitamin E together did not decrease the risk of prostate cancer. Diet It is not known if decreasing fat or increasing fruits and vegetables in the diet helps decrease the risk of prostate cancer or death from prostate cancer. In the PCPT trial, certain fatty acids increased the risk of high-grade prostate cancer while others decreased the risk of high-grade prostate cancer. Multivitamins Regular use of multivitamins has not been proven to increase the risk of early or localized prostate cancer. However, a large study showed an increased risk of advanced prostate cancer among men who took multivitamins more than seven times a week. Lycopene Some studies have shown that a diet high in lycopene may be linked to a decreased risk of prostate cancer, but other studies have not. It has not been proven that taking lycopene supplements decreases the risk of prostate cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. New ways to prevent prostate cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials can be found in the Clinical Trials section of the NCI website. Check NCI's list of cancer clinical trials for prostate cancer prevention trials that are accepting patients.
Who is at risk for Prostate Cancer? ?
Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. Avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. Risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. Increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. Talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. The following risk factors may increase the risk of prostate cancer: Age Prostate cancer is rare in men younger than 50 years of age. The chance of developing prostate cancer increases as men get older. Family history of prostate cancer A man whose father, brother, or son has had prostate cancer has a higher-than-average risk of prostate cancer. Race Prostate cancer occurs more often in African-American men than in white men. African-American men with prostate cancer are more likely to die from the disease than white men with prostate cancer. Hormones The prostate needs male hormones to work the way it should. The main male sex hormone is testosterone. Testosterone helps the body develop and maintain male sex characteristics. Testosterone is changed into dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by an enzyme in the body. DHT is important for normal prostate growth but can also cause the prostate to get bigger and may play a part in the development of prostate cancer. Vitamin E The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) found that vitamin E taken alone increased the risk of prostate cancer. The risk continued even after the men stopped taking vitamin E. Folic acid Folate is a kind of vitamin B that occurs naturally in some foods, such as green vegetables, beans and orange juice. Folic acid is a man-made form of folate that is found in vitamin supplements and fortified foods, such as whole-grain breads and cereals. A 10-year study showed that the risk of prostate cancer was increased in men who took 1 milligram (mg) supplements of folic acid. However, the risk of prostate cancer was lower in men who had enough folate in their diets. Dairy and calcium A diet high in dairy foods and calcium may cause a small increase in the risk of prostate cancer. The following protective factors may decrease the risk of prostate cancer: Folate Folate is a kind of vitamin B that occurs naturally in some foods, such as green vegetables, beans and orange juice. Folic acid is a man-made form of folate that is found in vitamin supplements and fortified foods, such as whole-grain breads and cereals. A 10-year study showed that the risk of prostate cancer was lower in men who had enough folate in their diets. However, the risk of prostate cancer was increased in men who took 1 milligram (mg) supplements of folic acid. Finasteride and Dutasteride Finasteride and dutasteride are drugs used to lower the amount of male sex hormones made by the body. These drugs block the enzyme that changes testosterone into dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Higher than normal levels of DHT may play a part in developing prostate cancer. Taking finasteride or dutasteride has been shown to lower the risk for prostate cancer, but it is not known if these drugs lower the risk of death from prostate cancer. The Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) studied whether the drug finasteride can prevent prostate cancer in healthy men 55 years of age and older. This prevention study showed there were fewer prostate cancers in the group of men that took finasteride compared with the group of men that did not. Also, the men who took finasteride who did have prostate cancer had more aggressive tumors. The number of deaths from prostate cancer was the same in both groups. Men who took finasteride reported more side effects compared with the group of men that did not, including erectile dysfunction, loss of desire for sex, and enlarged breasts. The Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events Trial (REDUCE) studied whether the drug dutasteride can prevent prostate cancer in men aged 50 to 75 years at higher risk for the disease. This prevention study showed there were fewer prostate cancers in the group of men who took dutasteride compared with the group of men that did not. The number of less aggressive prostate cancers was lower, but the number of more aggressive prostate cancers was not. Men who took dutasteride reported more side effects than men who did not, including erectile dysfunction, loss of desire for sex, less semen, and gynecomastia (enlarged breasts). The following have been proven not to affect the risk of prostate cancer, or their effects on prostate cancer risk are not known: Selenium and vitamin E The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) studied whether taking vitamin E and selenium (a mineral) will prevent prostate cancer. The selenium and vitamin E were taken separately or together by healthy men 55 years of age and older (50 years of age and older for African-American men). The study showed that taking selenium alone or selenium and vitamin E together did not decrease the risk of prostate cancer. Diet It is not known if decreasing fat or increasing fruits and vegetables in the diet helps decrease the risk of prostate cancer or death from prostate cancer. In the PCPT trial, certain fatty acids increased the risk of high-grade prostate cancer while others decreased the risk of high-grade prostate cancer. Multivitamins Regular use of multivitamins has not been proven to increase the risk of early or localized prostate cancer. However, a large study showed an increased risk of advanced prostate cancer among men who took multivitamins more than seven times a week. Lycopene Some studies have shown that a diet high in lycopene may be linked to a decreased risk of prostate cancer, but other studies have not. It has not been proven that taking lycopene supplements decreases the risk of prostate cancer.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Prostate Cancer ?
Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. Cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. Some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. Other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. Other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. The purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. These may include eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. New ways to prevent prostate cancer are being studied in clinical trials. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. Information about clinical trials can be found in the Clinical Trials section of the NCI website. Check NCI's list of cancer clinical trials for prostate cancer prevention trials that are accepting patients.
What is are Prostate Cancer ?
Prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. - Signs of prostate cancer include a weak flow of urine or frequent urination. - Tests that examine the prostate and blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose prostate cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder (the organ that collects and empties urine) and in front of the rectum (the lower part of the intestine). It is about the size of a walnut and surrounds part of the urethra (the tube that empties urine from the bladder). The prostate gland makes fluid that is part of the semen. Prostate cancer is most common in older men. In the U.S., about 1 out of 5 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer.
What are the symptoms of Prostate Cancer ?
Signs of prostate cancer include a weak flow of urine or frequent urination. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by prostate cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Weak or interrupted ("stop-and-go") flow of urine. - Sudden urge to urinate. - Frequent urination (especially at night). - Trouble starting the flow of urine. - Trouble emptying the bladder completely. - Pain or burning while urinating. - Blood in the urine or semen. - A pain in the back, hips, or pelvis that doesn't go away. - Shortness of breath, feeling very tired, fast heartbeat, dizziness, or pale skin caused by anemia. Other conditions may cause the same symptoms. As men age, the prostate may get bigger and block the urethra or bladder. This may cause trouble urinating or sexual problems. The condition is called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and although it is not cancer, surgery may be needed. The symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia or of other problems in the prostate may be like symptoms of prostate cancer.
How to diagnose Prostate Cancer ?
Tests that examine the prostate and blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose prostate cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Digital rectal exam (DRE): An exam of the rectum. The doctor or nurse inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum and feels the prostate through the rectal wall for lumps or abnormal areas. - Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test : A test that measures the level of PSA in the blood. PSA is a substance made by the prostate that may be found in an increased amount in the blood of men who have prostate cancer. PSA levels may also be high in men who have an infection or inflammation of the prostate or BPH (an enlarged, but noncancerous, prostate). - Transrectal ultrasound : A procedure in which a probe that is about the size of a finger is inserted into the rectum to check the prostate. The probe is used to bounce high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. Transrectal ultrasound may be used during a biopsy procedure. - Transrectal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): A procedure that uses a strong magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. A probe that gives off radio waves is inserted into the rectum near the prostate. This helps the MRI machine make clearer pictures of the prostate and nearby tissue. A transrectal MRI is done to find out if the cancer has spread outside the prostate into nearby tissues. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist. The pathologist will check the tissue sample to see if there are cancer cells and find out the Gleason score. The Gleason score ranges from 2-10 and describes how likely it is that a tumor will spread. The lower the number, the less likely the tumor is to spread. A transrectal biopsy is used to diagnose prostate cancer. A transrectal biopsy is the removal of tissue from the prostate by inserting a thin needle through the rectum and into the prostate. This procedure is usually done using transrectal ultrasound to help guide where samples of tissue are taken from. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells.
What is the outlook for Prostate Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (level of PSA, Gleason score, grade of the tumor, how much of the prostate is affected by the cancer, and whether the cancer has spread to other places in the body). - The patients age. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). Treatment options also may depend on the following: - Whether the patient has other health problems. - The expected side effects of treatment. - Past treatment for prostate cancer. - The wishes of the patient. Most men diagnosed with prostate cancer do not die of it.
What are the stages of Prostate Cancer ?
 After prostate cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the prostate or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for prostate cancer: - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV After prostate cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the prostate or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the prostate or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The results of the tests used to diagnose prostate cancer are often also used to stage the disease. (See the General Information section.) In prostate cancer, staging tests may not be done unless the patient has symptoms or signs that the cancer has spread, such as bone pain, a high PSA level, or a high Gleason score. The following tests and procedures also may be used in the staging process: - Bone scan : A procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material collects in the bones and is detected by a scanner. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Pelvic lymphadenectomy : A surgical procedure to remove the lymph nodes in the pelvis. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. - Seminal vesicle biopsy : The removal of fluid from the seminal vesicles (glands that make semen) using a needle. A pathologist views the fluid under a microscope to look for cancer cells. - ProstaScint scan : A procedure to check for cancer that has spread from the prostate to other parts of the body, such as the lymph nodes. A very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radioactive material attaches to prostate cancer cells and is detected by a scanner. The radioactive material shows up as a bright spot on the picture in areas where there are a lot of prostate cancer cells. The stage of the cancer is based on the results of the staging and diagnostic tests, including the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test and the Gleason score. The tissue samples removed during the biopsy are used to find out the Gleason score. The Gleason score ranges from 2-10 and describes how different the cancer cells look from normal cells and how likely it is that the tumor will spread. The lower the number, the less likely the tumor is to spread. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if prostate cancer spreads to the bone, the cancer cells in the bone are actually prostate cancer cells. The disease is metastatic prostate cancer, not bone cancer. Denosumab, a monoclonal antibody, may be used to prevent bone metastases. The following stages are used for prostate cancer: Stage I In stage I, cancer is found in the prostate only. The cancer: - is found by needle biopsy (done for a high PSA level) or in a small amount of tissue during surgery for other reasons (such as benign prostatic hyperplasia). The PSA level is lower than 10 and the Gleason score is 6 or lower; or - is found in one-half or less of one lobe of the prostate. The PSA level is lower than 10 and the Gleason score is 6 or lower; or - cannot be felt during a digital rectal exam and cannot be seen in imaging tests. Cancer is found in one-half or less of one lobe of the prostate. The PSA level and the Gleason score are not known. Stage II In stage II, cancer is more advanced than in stage I, but has not spread outside the prostate. Stage II is divided into stages IIA and IIB. In stage IIA, cancer: - is found by needle biopsy (done for a high PSA level) or in a small amount of tissue during surgery for other reasons (such as benign prostatic hyperplasia). The PSA level is lower than 20 and the Gleason score is 7; or - is found by needle biopsy (done for a high PSA level) or in a small amount of tissue during surgery for other reasons (such as benign prostatic hyperplasia). The PSA level is at least 10 but lower than 20 and the Gleason score is 6 or lower; or - is found in one-half or less of one lobe of the prostate. The PSA level is at least 10 but lower than 20 and the Gleason score is 6 or lower; or - is found in one-half or less of one lobe of the prostate. The PSA level is lower than 20 and the Gleason score is 7; or - is found in more than one-half of one lobe of the prostate. In stage IIB, cancer: - is found in opposite sides of the prostate. The PSA can be any level and the Gleason score can range from 2 to 10; or - cannot be felt during a digital rectal exam and cannot be seen in imaging tests. The PSA level is 20 or higher and the Gleason score can range from 2 to 10; or - cannot be felt during a digital rectal exam and cannot be seen in imaging tests. The PSA can be any level and the Gleason score is 8 or higher. Stage III In stage III, cancer has spread beyond the outer layer of the prostate and may have spread to the seminal vesicles. The PSA can be any level and the Gleason score can range from 2 to 10. Stage IV In stage IV, the PSA can be any level and the Gleason score can range from 2 to 10. Also, cancer: - has spread beyond the seminal vesicles to nearby tissue or organs, such as the rectum, bladder, or pelvic wall; or - may have spread to the seminal vesicles or to nearby tissue or organs, such as the rectum, bladder, or pelvic wall. Cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes; or - has spread to distant parts of the body, which may include lymph nodes or bones. Prostate cancer often spreads to the bones.
What are the treatments for Prostate Cancer ?
 There are different types of treatment for patients with prostate cancer. - Seven types of standard treatment are used: - Watchful waiting or active surveillance - Surgery - Radiation therapy and radiopharmaceutical therapy - Hormone therapy - Chemotherapy - Biologic therapy - Bisphosphonate therapy - There are treatments for bone pain caused by bone metastases or hormone therapy. - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Cryosurgery - High-intensityfocused ultrasound therapy - Proton beam radiation therapy - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with prostate cancer. Different types of treatment are available for patients with prostate cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Seven types of standard treatment are used: Watchful waiting or active surveillance Watchful waiting and active surveillance are treatments used for older men who do not have signs or symptoms or have other medical conditions and for men whose prostate cancer is found during a screening test. Watchful waiting is closely monitoring a patients condition without giving any treatment until signs or symptoms appear or change. Treatment is given to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life. Active surveillance is closely following a patient's condition without giving any treatment unless there are changes in test results. It is used to find early signs that the condition is getting worse. In active surveillance, patients are given certain exams and tests, including digital rectal exam, PSA test, transrectal ultrasound, and transrectal needle biopsy, to check if the cancer is growing. When the cancer begins to grow, treatment is given to cure the cancer. Other terms that are used to describe not giving treatment to cure prostate cancer right after diagnosis are observation, watch and wait, and expectant management. Surgery Patients in good health whose tumor is in the prostate gland only may be treated with surgery to remove the tumor. The following types of surgery are used: - Radical prostatectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the prostate, surrounding tissue, and seminal vesicles. There are two types of radical prostatectomy: - Retropubic prostatectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the prostate through an incision (cut) in the abdominal wall. Removal of nearby lymph nodes may be done at the same time. - Perineal prostatectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the prostate through an incision (cut) made in the perineum (area between the scrotum and anus). Nearby lymph nodes may also be removed through a separate incision in the abdomen. - Pelvic lymphadenectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the lymph nodes in the pelvis. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If the lymph nodes contain cancer, the doctor will not remove the prostate and may recommend other treatment. - Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP): A surgical procedure to remove tissue from the prostate using a resectoscope (a thin, lighted tube with a cutting tool) inserted through the urethra. This procedure is done to treat benign prostatic hypertrophy and it is sometimes done to relieve symptoms caused by a tumor before other cancer treatment is given. TURP may also be done in men whose tumor is in the prostate only and who cannot have a radical prostatectomy. In some cases, nerve-sparing surgery can be done. This type of surgery may save the nerves that control erection. However, men with large tumors or tumors that are very close to the nerves may not be able to have this surgery. Possible problems after prostate cancer surgery include the following: - Impotence. - Leakage of urine from the bladder or stool from the rectum. - Shortening of the penis (1 to 2 centimeters). The exact reason for this is not known. - Inguinal hernia (bulging of fat or part of the small intestine through weak muscles into the groin). Inguinal hernia may occur more often in men treated with radical prostatectomy than in men who have some other types of prostate surgery, radiation therapy, or prostate biopsy alone. It is most likely to occur within the first 2 years after radical prostatectomy. Radiation therapy and radiopharmaceutical therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are different types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. Conformal radiation is a type of external radiation therapy that uses a computer to make a 3-dimensional (3-D) picture of the tumor and shapes the radiation beams to fit the tumor. This allows a high dose of radiation to reach the tumor and causes less damage to nearby healthy tissue. Hypofractionated radiation therapy may be given because it has a more convenient treatment schedule. Hypofractionated radiation therapy is radiation treatment in which a larger than usual total dose of radiation is given once a day over a shorter period of time (fewer days) compared to standard radiation therapy. Hypofractionated radiation therapy may have worse side effects than standard radiation therapy, depending on the schedules used. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. In early-stage prostate cancer, the radioactive seeds are placed in the prostate using needles that are inserted through the skin between the scrotum and rectum. The placement of the radioactive seeds in the prostate is guided by images from transrectal ultrasound or computed tomography (CT). The needles are removed after the radioactive seeds are placed in the prostate. - Radiopharmaceutical therapy uses a radioactive substance to treat cancer. Radiopharmaceutical therapy includes the following: - Alpha emitter radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance to treat prostate cancer that has spread to the bone. A radioactive substance called radium-223 is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. The radium-223 collects in areas of bone with cancer and kills the cancer cells. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy, internal radiation therapy, and radiopharmaceutical therapy are used to treat prostate cancer. Men treated with radiation therapy for prostate cancer have an increased risk of having bladder and/or gastrointestinal cancer. Radiation therapy can cause impotence and urinary problems. Hormone therapy Hormone therapy is a cancer treatment that removes hormones or blocks their action and stops cancer cells from growing. Hormones are substances made by glands in the body and circulated in the bloodstream. In prostate cancer, male sex hormones can cause prostate cancer to grow. Drugs, surgery, or other hormones are used to reduce the amount of male hormones or block them from working. Hormone therapy for prostate cancer may include the following: - Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonists can stop the testicles from making testosterone. Examples are leuprolide, goserelin, and buserelin. - Antiandrogens can block the action of androgens (hormones that promote male sex characteristics), such as testosterone. Examples are flutamide, bicalutamide, enzalutamide, and nilutamide. - Drugs that can prevent the adrenal glands from making androgens include ketoconazole and aminoglutethimide. - Orchiectomy is a surgical procedure to remove one or both testicles, the main source of male hormones, such as testosterone, to decrease the amount of hormone being made. - Estrogens (hormones that promote female sex characteristics) can prevent the testicles from making testosterone. However, estrogens are seldom used today in the treatment of prostate cancer because of the risk of serious side effects. Hot flashes, impaired sexual function, loss of desire for sex, and weakened bones may occur in men treated with hormone therapy. Other side effects include diarrhea, nausea, and itching. See Drugs Approved for Prostate Cancer for more information. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. See Drugs Approved for Prostate Cancer for more information. Biologic therapy Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patients immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the bodys natural defenses against cancer. Sipuleucel-T is a type of biologic therapy used to treat prostate cancer that has metastasized (spread to other parts of the body). See Drugs Approved for Prostate Cancer for more information. Bisphosphonate therapy Bisphosphonate drugs, such as clodronate or zoledronate, reduce bone disease when cancer has spread to the bone. Men who are treated with antiandrogen therapy or orchiectomy are at an increased risk of bone loss. In these men, bisphosphonate drugs lessen the risk of bone fracture (breaks). The use of bisphosphonate drugs to prevent or slow the growth of bone metastases is being studied in clinical trials. There are treatments for bone pain caused by bone metastases or hormone therapy. Prostate cancer that has spread to the bone and certain types of hormone therapy can weaken bones and lead to bone pain. Treatments for bone pain include the following: - Pain medicine. - External radiation therapy. - Strontium-89 (a radioisotope). - Targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody, such as denosumab. - Bisphosphonate therapy. - Corticosteroids. See the PDQ summary on Pain for more information. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Cryosurgery Cryosurgery is a treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy prostate cancer cells. Ultrasound is used to find the area that will be treated. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy. Cryosurgery can cause impotence and leakage of urine from the bladder or stool from the rectum. High-intensityfocused ultrasound therapy High-intensityfocused ultrasound therapy is a treatment that uses ultrasound (high-energy sound waves) to destroy cancer cells. To treat prostate cancer, an endorectal probe is used to make the sound waves. Proton beam radiation therapy Proton beam radiation therapy is a type of high-energy, external radiation therapy that targets tumors with streams of protons (small, positively charged particles). This type of radiation therapy is being studied in the treatment of prostate cancer. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options by Stage Stage I Prostate Cancer Standard treatment of stage I prostate cancer may include the following: - Watchful waiting. - Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone therapy may be given. - Radical prostatectomy, usually with pelvic lymphadenectomy. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - External radiation therapy. Hormone therapy may be given after radiation therapy. - Internal radiation therapy with radioactive seeds. - A clinical trial of high-intensityfocused ultrasound therapy. - A clinical trial of cryosurgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I prostate cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage II Prostate Cancer Standard treatment of stage II prostate cancer may include the following: - Watchful waiting. - Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone therapy may be given. - Radical prostatectomy, usually with pelvic lymphadenectomy. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - External radiation therapy. Hormone therapy may be given after radiation therapy. - Internal radiation therapy with radioactive seeds. - A clinical trial of cryosurgery. - A clinical trial of high-intensityfocused ultrasound therapy. - A clinical trial of proton beam radiation therapy. - Clinical trials of new types of treatment, such as hormone therapy followed by radical prostatectomy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II prostate cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Prostate Cancer Standard treatment of stage III prostate cancer may include the following: - External radiation therapy. Hormone therapy may be given after radiation therapy. - Hormone therapy. - Radical prostatectomy. Radiation therapy may be given after surgery. - Watchful waiting. - Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone therapy may be given. Treatment to control cancer that is in the prostate and lessen urinary symptoms may include the following: - External radiation therapy. - Internal radiation therapy with radioactive seeds. - Hormone therapy. - Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). - A clinical trial of new types of radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of cryosurgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III prostate cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage IV Prostate Cancer Standard treatment of stage IV prostate cancer may include the following: - Hormone therapy. - Hormone therapy combined with chemotherapy. - Bisphosphonate therapy. - External radiation therapy. Hormone therapy may be given after radiation therapy. - Alpha emitter radiation therapy. - Watchful waiting. - Active surveillance. If the cancer begins to grow, hormone therapy may be given. - A clinical trial of radical prostatectomy with orchiectomy. Treatment to control cancer that is in the prostate and lessen urinary symptoms may include the following: - Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). - Radiation therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV prostate cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Prostate Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Cryosurgery Cryosurgery is a treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy prostate cancer cells. Ultrasound is used to find the area that will be treated. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy. Cryosurgery can cause impotence and leakage of urine from the bladder or stool from the rectum. High-intensityfocused ultrasound therapy High-intensityfocused ultrasound therapy is a treatment that uses ultrasound (high-energy sound waves) to destroy cancer cells. To treat prostate cancer, an endorectal probe is used to make the sound waves. Proton beam radiation therapy Proton beam radiation therapy is a type of high-energy, external radiation therapy that targets tumors with streams of protons (small, positively charged particles). This type of radiation therapy is being studied in the treatment of prostate cancer. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Pituitary Tumors ?
A pituitary tumor is a growth of abnormal cells in the tissues of the pituitary gland. - The pituitary gland hormones control many other glands in the body. - Having certain genetic conditions increases the risk of developing a pituitary tumor. - Signs of a pituitary tumor include problems with vision and certain physical changes. - Imaging studies and tests that examine the blood and urine are used to detect (find) and diagnose a pituitary tumor. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. A pituitary tumor is a growth of abnormal cells in the tissues of the pituitary gland. Pituitary tumors form in the pituitary gland, a pea-sized organ in the center of the brain, just above the back of the nose. The pituitary gland is sometimes called the "master endocrine gland" because it makes hormones that affect the way many parts of the body work. It also controls hormones made by many other glands in the body. Pituitary tumors are divided into three groups: - Benign pituitary adenomas: Tumors that are not cancer. These tumors grow very slowly and do not spread from the pituitary gland to other parts of the body. - Invasive pituitary adenomas: Benign tumors that may spread to bones of the skull or the sinus cavity below the pituitary gland. - Pituitary carcinomas: Tumors that are malignant (cancer). These pituitary tumors spread into other areas of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) or outside of the central nervous system. Very few pituitary tumors are malignant. Pituitary tumors may be either non-functioning or functioning. - Non-functioning pituitary tumors do not make extra amounts of hormones. - Functioning pituitary tumors make more than the normal amount of one or more hormones. Most pituitary tumors are functioning tumors. The extra hormones made by pituitary tumors may cause certain signs or symptoms of disease. The pituitary gland hormones control many other glands in the body. Hormones made by the pituitary gland include: - Prolactin: A hormone that causes a womans breasts to make milk during and after pregnancy. - Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH): A hormone that causes the adrenal glands to make a hormone called cortisol. Cortisol helps control the use of sugar, protein, and fats in the body and helps the body deal with stress. - Growth hormone: A hormone that helps control body growth and the use of sugar and fat in the body. Growth hormone is also called somatotropin. - Thyroid-stimulating hormone: A hormone that causes the thyroid gland to make other hormones that control growth, body temperature, and heart rate. Thyroid-stimulating hormone is also called thyrotropin. - Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): Hormones that control the menstrual cycle in women and the making of sperm in men.
Who is at risk for Pituitary Tumors? ?
Having certain genetic conditions increases the risk of developing a pituitary tumor.Anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for pituitary tumors include having the following hereditary diseases: - Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) syndrome. - Carney complex. - Isolated familial acromegaly.
What are the symptoms of Pituitary Tumors ?
Signs of a pituitary tumor include problems with vision and certain physical changes. Signs and symptoms can be caused by the growth of the tumor and/or by hormones the tumor makes or by other conditions. Some tumors may not cause signs or symptoms. Check with your doctor if you have any of these problems. Signs and symptoms of a non-functioning pituitary tumor Sometimes, a pituitary tumor may press on or damage parts of the pituitary gland, causing it to stop making one or more hormones. Too little of a certain hormone will affect the work of the gland or organ that the hormone controls. The following signs and symptoms may occur: - Headache. - Some loss of vision. - Loss of body hair. - In women, less frequent or no menstrual periods or no milk from the breasts. - In men, loss of facial hair, growth of breast tissue, and impotence. - In women and men, lower sex drive. - In children, slowed growth and sexual development. Most of the tumors that make LH and FSH do not make enough extra hormone to cause signs and symptoms. These tumors are considered to be non-functioning tumors. Signs and symptoms of a functioning pituitary tumor When a functioning pituitary tumor makes extra hormones, the signs and symptoms will depend on the type of hormone being made. Too much prolactin may cause: - Headache. - Some loss of vision. - Less frequent or no menstrual periods or menstrual periods with a very light flow. - Trouble becoming pregnant or an inability to become pregnant. - Impotence in men. - Lower sex drive. - Flow of breast milk in a woman who is not pregnant or breast-feeding. Too much ACTH may cause: - Headache. - Some loss of vision. - Weight gain in the face, neck, and trunk of the body, and thin arms and legs. - A lump of fat on the back of the neck. - Thin skin that may have purple or pink stretch marks on the chest or abdomen. - Easy bruising. - Growth of fine hair on the face, upper back, or arms. - Bones that break easily. - Anxiety, irritability, and depression. Too much growth hormone may cause: - Headache. - Some loss of vision. - In adults, acromegaly (growth of the bones in the face, hands, and feet). In children, the whole body may grow much taller and larger than normal. - Tingling or numbness in the hands and fingers. - Snoring or pauses in breathing during sleep. - Joint pain. - Sweating more than usual. - Dysmorphophobia (extreme dislike of or concern about one or more parts of the body). Too much thyroid-stimulating hormone may cause: - Irregular heartbeat. - Shakiness. - Weight loss. - Trouble sleeping. - Frequent bowel movements. - Sweating. Other general signs and symptoms of pituitary tumors: - Nausea and vomiting. - Confusion. - Dizziness. - Seizures. - Runny or "drippy" nose (cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord leaks into the nose).
How to diagnose Pituitary Tumors ?
Imaging studies and tests that examine the blood and urine are used to detect (find) and diagnose a pituitary tumor. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Eye exam: An exam to check vision and the general health of the eyes. - Visual field exam: An exam to check a persons field of vision (the total area in which objects can be seen). This test measures both central vision (how much a person can see when looking straight ahead) and peripheral vision (how much a person can see in all other directions while staring straight ahead). The eyes are tested one at a time. The eye not being tested is covered. - Neurological exam : A series of questions and tests to check the brain, spinal cord, and nerve function. The exam checks a persons mental status, coordination, and ability to walk normally, and how well the muscles, senses, and reflexes work. This may also be called a neuro exam or a neurologic exam. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) with gadolinium : A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the brain and spinal cord. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Blood chemistry study : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances, such as glucose (sugar), released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - Blood tests: Tests to measure the levels of testosterone or estrogen in the blood. A higher or lower than normal amount of these hormones may be a sign of pituitary tumor. - Twenty-four-hour urine test: A test in which urine is collected for 24 hours to measure the amounts of certain substances. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease in the organ or tissue that makes it. A higher than normal amount of the hormone cortisol may be a sign of a pituitary tumor and Cushing syndrome. - High-dose dexamethasone suppression test: A test in which one or more high doses of dexamethasone are given. The level of cortisol is checked from a sample of blood or from urine that is collected for three days. This test is done to check if the adrenal gland is making too much cortisol or if the pituitary gland is telling the adrenal glands to make too much cortisol. - Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test: A test in which one or more small doses of dexamethasone are given. The level of cortisol is checked from a sample of blood or from urine that is collected for three days. This test is done to check if the adrenal gland is making too much cortisol. - Venous sampling for pituitary tumors: A procedure in which a sample of blood is taken from veins coming from the pituitary gland. The sample is checked to measure the amount of ACTH released into the blood by the gland. Venous sampling may be done if blood tests show there is a tumor making ACTH, but the pituitary gland looks normal in the imaging tests. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The following tests may be done on the sample of tissue that is removed: - Immunohistochemistry : A test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of tissue. The antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the tissue to light up under a microscope. This type of test may be used to tell the difference between different types of cancer. - Immunocytochemistry : A test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of cells. The antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the cells to light up under a microscope. This type of test may be used to tell the difference between different types of cancer. - Light and electron microscopy : A laboratory test in which cells in a sample of tissue are viewed under regular and high-powered microscopes to look for certain changes in the cells.
What is the outlook for Pituitary Tumors ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) depends on the type of tumor and whether the tumor has spread into other areas of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) or outside of the central nervous system to other parts of the body. Treatment options depend on the following: - The type and size of the tumor. - Whether the tumor is making hormones. - Whether the tumor is causing problems with vision or other signs or symptoms. - Whether the tumor has spread into the brain around the pituitary gland or to other parts of the body. - Whether the tumor has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Pituitary Tumors ?
Once a pituitary tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if it has spread within the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) or to other parts of the body. - Pituitary tumors are described in several ways. Once a pituitary tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if it has spread within the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) or to other parts of the body. The extent or spread of cancer is usually described as stages. There is no standard staging system for pituitary tumors. Once a pituitary tumor is found, tests are done to find out if the tumor has spread into the brain or to other parts of the body. The following test may be used: - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). Pituitary tumors are described in several ways. Pituitary tumors are described by their size and grade, whether or not they make extra hormones, and whether the tumor has spread to other parts of the body. The following sizes are used: - Microadenoma: The tumor is smaller than 1 centimeter. - Macroadenoma: The tumor is 1 centimeter or larger. Most pituitary adenomas are microadenomas. The grade of a pituitary tumor is based on how far it has grown into the surrounding area of the brain, including the sella (the bone at the base of the skull, where the pituitary gland sits).
What are the treatments for Pituitary Tumors ?
There are different types of treatment for patients with pituitary tumors. - Four types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Drug therapy - Chemotherapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with pituitary tumors. Different types of treatments are available for patients with pituitary tumors. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Many pituitary tumors can be removed by surgery using one of the following operations: - Transsphenoidal surgery: A type of surgery in which the instruments are inserted into part of the brain by going through an incision (cut) made under the upper lip or at the bottom of the nose between the nostrils and then through the sphenoid bone (a butterfly-shaped bone at the base of the skull) to reach the pituitary gland. The pituitary gland lies just above the sphenoid bone. - Endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery: A type of surgery in which an endoscope is inserted through an incision (cut) made at the back of the inside of the nose and then through the sphenoid bone to reach the pituitary gland. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light, a lens for viewing, and a tool for removing tumor tissue. - Craniotomy: Surgery to remove the tumor through an opening made in the skull. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. Certain ways of giving radiation therapy can help keep radiation from damaging nearby healthy tissue. This type of radiation therapy may include the following: - Stereotactic radiosurgery: A rigid head frame is attached to the skull to keep the head still during the radiation treatment. A machine aims a single large dose of radiation directly at the tumor. This procedure does not involve surgery. It is also called stereotaxic radiosurgery, radiosurgery, and radiation surgery. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat pituitary tumors. Drug therapy Drugs may be given to stop a functioning pituitary tumor from making too many hormones. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy may be used as palliative treatment for pituitary carcinomas, to relieve symptoms and improve the patient's quality of life. Chemotherapy uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type of the cancer being treated. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Pituitary Tumors Non-functioning Pituitary Tumors Treatment may include the following: - Surgery (transsphenoidal surgery, if possible) to remove the tumor, followed by watchful waiting (closely monitoring a patients condition without giving any treatment until signs or symptoms appear or change). Radiation therapy is given if the tumor comes back. - Radiation therapy alone. Treatment for luteinizing hormone -producing and follicle-stimulating hormone -producing tumors is usually transsphenoidal surgery to remove the tumor. Prolactin-Producing Pituitary Tumors Treatment may include the following: - Drug therapy to stop the tumor from making prolactin and to stop the tumor from growing. - Surgery to remove the tumor (transsphenoidal surgery or craniotomy) when the tumor does not respond to drug therapy or when the patient cannot take the drug. - Radiation therapy. - Surgery followed by radiation therapy. ACTH-Producing Pituitary Tumors Treatment may include the following: - Surgery (usually transsphenoidal surgery) to remove the tumor, with or without radiation therapy. - Radiation therapy alone. - Drug therapy to stop the tumor from making ACTH. - A clinical trial of stereotactic radiation surgery. Growth HormoneProducing Pituitary Tumors Treatment may include the following: - Surgery (usually transsphenoidal or endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery) to remove the tumor, with or without radiation therapy. - Drug therapy to stop the tumor from making growth hormone. Thyroid-Stimulating HormoneProducing Tumors Treatment may include the following: - Surgery (usually transsphenoidal surgery) to remove the tumor, with or without radiation therapy. - Drug therapy to stop the tumor from making hormones. Pituitary Carcinomas Treatment of pituitary carcinomas is palliative, to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. Treatment may include the following: - Surgery (transsphenoidal surgery or craniotomy) to remove the cancer, with or without radiation therapy. - Drug therapy to stop the tumor from making hormones. - Chemotherapy. Recurrent Pituitary Tumors Treatment may include the following: - Radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of stereotactic radiation surgery.
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Pituitary Tumors ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Penile Cancer ?
Penile cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the penis. - Human papillomavirus infection may increase the risk of developing penile cancer. - Signs of penile cancer include sores, discharge, and bleeding. - Tests that examine the penis are used to detect (find) and diagnose penile cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Penile cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the penis. The penis is a rod-shaped male reproductive organ that passes sperm and urine from the body. It contains two types of erectile tissue (spongy tissue with blood vessels that fill with blood to make an erection): - Corpora cavernosa: The two columns of erectile tissue that form most of the penis. - Corpus spongiosum: The single column of erectile tissue that forms a small portion of the penis. The corpus spongiosum surrounds the urethra (the tube through which urine and sperm pass from the body). The erectile tissue is wrapped in connective tissue and covered with skin. The glans (head of the penis) is covered with loose skin called the foreskin.
Who is at risk for Penile Cancer? ?
Human papillomavirus infection may increase the risk of developing penile cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for penile cancer include the following: Circumcision may help prevent infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV). A circumcision is an operation in which the doctor removes part or all of the foreskin from the penis. Many boys are circumcised shortly after birth. Men who were not circumcised at birth may have a higher risk of developing penile cancer. Other risk factors for penile cancer include the following: - Being age 60 or older. - Having phimosis (a condition in which the foreskin of the penis cannot be pulled back over the glans). - Having poor personal hygiene. - Having many sexual partners. - Using tobacco products.
What are the symptoms of Penile Cancer ?
Signs of penile cancer include sores, discharge, and bleeding. These and other signs may be caused by penile cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Redness, irritation, or a sore on the penis. - A lump on the penis.
How to diagnose Penile Cancer ?
Tests that examine the penis are used to detect (find) and diagnose penile cancer. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking the penis for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The tissue sample is removed during one of the following procedures: - Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy : The removal of tissue or fluid using a thin needle. - Incisional biopsy : The removal of part of a lump or a sample of tissue that doesn't look normal. - Excisional biopsy : The removal of an entire lump or area of tissue that doesnt look normal.
What is the outlook for Penile Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer. - The location and size of the tumor. - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back).
What are the stages of Penile Cancer ?
After penile cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the penis or to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for penile cancer: - Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage III - Stage IV After penile cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the penis or to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the penis or to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. The following tests and procedures may be used in the staging process: - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. A substance called gadolinium is injected into a vein. The gadolinium collects around the cancer cells so they show up brighter in the picture. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The tissue sample is removed during one of the following procedures: - Sentinel lymph node biopsy : The removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. - Lymph node dissection : A procedure to remove one or more lymph nodes during surgery. A sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. This procedure is also called a lymphadenectomy. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if penile cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually penile cancer cells. The disease is metastatic penile cancer, not lung cancer. The following stages are used for penile cancer: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal cells or growths that look like warts are found on the surface of the skin of the penis. These abnormal cells or growths may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed and spread to connective tissue just under the skin of the penis. Cancer has not spread to lymph vessels or blood vessels. The tumor cells look a lot like normal cells under a microscope. Stage II In stage II, cancer has spread: - to connective tissue just under the skin of the penis. Also, cancer has spread to lymph vessels or blood vessels or the tumor cells may look very different from normal cells under a microscope; or - through connective tissue to erectile tissue (spongy tissue that fills with blood to make an erection); or - beyond erectile tissue to the urethra. Stage III Stage III is divided into stage IIIa and stage IIIb. In stage IIIa, cancer has spread to one lymph node in the groin. Cancer has also spread: - to connective tissue just under the skin of the penis. Also, cancer may have spread to lymph vessels or blood vessels or the tumor cells may look very different from normal cells under a microscope; or - through connective tissue to erectile tissue (spongy tissue that fills with blood to make an erection); or - beyond erectile tissue to the urethra. In stage IIIb, cancer has spread to more than one lymph node on one side of the groin or to lymph nodes on both sides of the groin. Cancer has also spread: - to connective tissue just under the skin of the penis. Also, cancer may have spread to lymph vessels or blood vessels or the tumor cells may look very different from normal cells under a microscope; or - through connective tissue to erectile tissue (spongy tissue that fills with blood to make an erection); or - beyond erectile tissue to the urethra. Stage IV In stage IV, cancer has spread: - to tissues near the penis such as the prostate, and may have spread to lymph nodes in the groin or pelvis; or - to one or more lymph nodes in the pelvis, or cancer has spread from the lymph nodes to the tissues around the lymph nodes; or - to distant parts of the body.
What are the treatments for Penile Cancer ?
There are different types of treatment for patients with penile cancer. - Four types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Biologic therapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Radiosensitizers - Sentinel lymph node biopsy followed by surgery - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with penile cancer. Different types of treatments are available for patients with penile cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery is the most common treatment for all stages of penile cancer. A doctor may remove the cancer using one of the following operations: - Mohs microsurgery: A procedure in which the tumor is cut from the skin in thin layers. During the surgery, the edges of the tumor and each layer of tumor removed are viewed through a microscope to check for cancer cells. Layers continue to be removed until no more cancer cells are seen. This type of surgery removes as little normal tissue as possible and is often used to remove cancer on the skin. It is also called Mohs surgery. - Laser surgery: A surgical procedure that uses a laser beam (a narrow beam of intense light) as a knife to make bloodless cuts in tissue or to remove a surface lesion such as a tumor. - Cryosurgery: A treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. This type of treatment is also called cryotherapy. - Circumcision: Surgery to remove part or all of the foreskin of the penis. - Wide local excision: Surgery to remove only the cancer and some normal tissue around it. - Amputation of the penis: Surgery to remove part or all of the penis. If part of the penis is removed, it is a partial penectomy. If all of the penis is removed, it is a total penectomy. Lymph nodes in the groin may be taken out during surgery. Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the surgery, some patients may be given chemotherapy or radiation therapy after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. Treatment given after the surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External and internal radiation therapy are used to treat penile cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly onto the skin (topical chemotherapy) or into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Topical chemotherapy may be used to treat stage 0 penile cancer. See Drugs Approved for Penile Cancer for more information. Biologic therapy Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patient's immune system to fight cancer. Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the body's natural defenses against cancer. This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or immunotherapy. Topical biologic therapy with imiquimod may be used to treat stage 0 penile cancer. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Radiosensitizers Radiosensitizers are drugs that make tumor cells more sensitive to radiation therapy. Combining radiation therapy with radiosensitizers helps kill more tumor cells. Sentinel lymph node biopsy followed by surgery Sentinel lymph node biopsy is the removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. After the sentinel lymph node biopsy, the surgeon removes the cancer. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options by Stage Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) Treatment of stage 0 may be one of the following: - Mohs microsurgery. - Topical chemotherapy. - Topical biologic therapy with imiquimod. - Laser surgery. - Cryosurgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage 0 penile cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage I Penile Cancer If the cancer is only in the foreskin, wide local excision and circumcision may be the only treatment needed. Treatment of stage I penile cancer may include the following: - Surgery (partial or total penectomy with or without removal of lymph nodes in the groin. - External or internal radiation therapy. - Mohs microsurgery. - A clinical trial of laser therapy. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage I penile cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage II Penile Cancer Treatment of stage II penile cancer may include the following: - Surgery (partial or total penectomy, with or without removal of lymph nodes in the groin). - External or internal radiation therapy followed by surgery. - A clinical trial of sentinel lymph node biopsy followed by surgery. - A clinical trial of laser surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage II penile cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage III Penile Cancer Treatment of stage III penile cancer may include the following: - Surgery (penectomy and removal of lymph nodes in the groin) with or without radiation therapy. - Radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of sentinel lymph node biopsy followed by surgery. - A clinical trial of radiosensitizers. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy before or after surgery. - A clinical trial of new drugs, biologic therapy, or new kinds of surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage III penile cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Stage IV Penile Cancer Treatment of stage IV penile cancer is usually palliative (to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life). Treatment may include the following: - Surgery (wide local excision and removal of lymph nodes in the groin). - Radiation therapy. - A clinical trial of chemotherapy before or after surgery. - A clinical trial of new drugs, biologic therapy, or new kinds of surgery. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with stage IV penile cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Penile Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Radiosensitizers Radiosensitizers are drugs that make tumor cells more sensitive to radiation therapy. Combining radiation therapy with radiosensitizers helps kill more tumor cells. Sentinel lymph node biopsy followed by surgery Sentinel lymph node biopsy is the removal of the sentinel lymph node during surgery. The sentinel lymph node is the first lymph node to receive lymphatic drainage from a tumor. It is the first lymph node the cancer is likely to spread to from the tumor. A radioactive substance and/or blue dye is injected near the tumor. The substance or dye flows through the lymph ducts to the lymph nodes. The first lymph node to receive the substance or dye is removed. A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells. If cancer cells are not found, it may not be necessary to remove more lymph nodes. After the sentinel lymph node biopsy, the surgeon removes the cancer. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Parathyroid Cancer ?
Parathyroid cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of a parathyroid gland. - Having certain inherited disorders can increase the risk of developing parathyroid cancer. - Signs and symptoms of parathyroid cancer include weakness, feeling tired, and a lump in the neck. - Tests that examine the neck and blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose parathyroid cancer. - Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Parathyroid cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of a parathyroid gland. The parathyroid glands are four pea-sized organs found in the neck near the thyroid gland. The parathyroid glands make parathyroid hormone (PTH or parathormone). PTH helps the body use and store calcium to keep the calcium in the blood at normal levels. A parathyroid gland may become overactive and make too much PTH, a condition called hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism can occur when a benign tumor (noncancer), called an adenoma, forms on one of the parathyroid glands, and causes it to grow and become overactive. Sometimes hyperparathyroidism can be caused by parathyroid cancer, but this is very rare. The extra PTH causes: - The calcium stored in the bones to move into the blood. - The intestines to absorb more calcium from the food we eat. This condition is called hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood). The hypercalcemia caused by hyperparathyroidism is more serious and life-threatening than parathyroid cancer itself and treating hypercalcemia is as important as treating the cancer.
Who is at risk for Parathyroid Cancer? ?
Having certain inherited disorders can increase the risk of developing parathyroid cancer. Anything that increases the chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Risk factors for parathyroid cancer include the following rare disorders that are inherited (passed down from parent to child): - Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism (FIHP). - Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) syndrome. Treatment with radiation therapy may increase the risk of developing a parathyroid adenoma.
What are the symptoms of Parathyroid Cancer ?
Signs and symptoms of parathyroid cancer include weakness, feeling tired, and a lump in the neck. Most parathyroid cancer signs and symptoms are caused by the hypercalcemia that develops. Signs and symptoms of hypercalcemia include the following: - Weakness. - Feeling very tired. - Nausea and vomiting. - Loss of appetite. - Weight loss for no known reason. - Being much more thirsty than usual. - Urinating much more than usual. - Constipation. - Trouble thinking clearly. Other signs and symptoms of parathyroid cancer include the following: - Pain in the abdomen, side, or back that doesn't go away. - Pain in the bones. - A broken bone. - A lump in the neck. - Change in voice such as hoarseness. - Trouble swallowing. Other conditions may cause the same signs and symptoms as parathyroid cancer. Check with your doctor if you have any of these problems.
How to diagnose Parathyroid Cancer ?
Tests that examine the neck and blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose parathyroid cancer. Once blood tests are done and hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed, imaging tests may be done to help find which of the parathyroid glands is overactive. Sometimes the parathyroid glands are hard to find and imaging tests are done to find exactly where they are. Parathyroid cancer may be hard to diagnose because the cells of a benign parathyroid adenoma and a malignant parathyroid cancer look alike. The patient's symptoms, blood levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone, and characteristics of the tumor are also used to make a diagnosis. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. To diagnose parathyroid cancer, the sample of blood is checked for its calcium level. - Parathyroid hormone test: A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amount of parathyroid hormone released into the blood by the parathyroid glands. A higher than normal amount of parathyroid hormone can be a sign of disease. - Sestamibi scan : A type of radionuclide scan used to find an overactive parathyroid gland. A very small amount of a radioactive substance called technetium 99 is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream to the parathyroid gland. The radioactive substance will collect in the overactive gland and show up brightly on a special camera that detects radioactivity. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - SPECT scan (single photon emission computed tomography scan): A procedure that uses a special camera linked to a computer to make a 3-dimensional (3-D) picture. A very small amount of a radioactive substance is injected into a vein. As the substance travels through the blood, the camera rotates around the neck and takes pictures. Blood flow and metabolism are higher than normal in areas where cancer cells are growing. These areas will show up brighter in the picture. This procedure may be done just before or after a CT scan. - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. - Angiogram : A procedure to look at blood vessels and the flow of blood. A contrast dye is injected into the blood vessel. As the contrast dye moves through the blood vessel, x-rays are taken to see if there are any blockages. - Venous sampling : A procedure in which a sample of blood is taken from specific veins and checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by nearby organs and tissues. If imaging tests do not show which parathyroid gland is overactive, blood samples may be taken from veins near each parathyroid gland to find which one is making too much PTH.
What is the outlook for Parathyroid Cancer ?
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - Whether the calcium level in the blood can be controlled. - The stage of the cancer. - Whether the tumor and the capsule around the tumor can be completely removed by surgery. - The patient's general health.
What are the stages of Parathyroid Cancer ?
After parathyroid cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - There is no standard staging process for parathyroid cancer. After parathyroid cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer has spread to other parts of the body is called staging. The following imaging tests may be used to determine if cancer has spread to other parts of the body such as the lungs, liver, bone, heart, pancreas, or lymph nodes: - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if parathyroid cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually parathyroid cancer cells. The disease is metastatic parathyroid cancer, not lung cancer. There is no standard staging process for parathyroid cancer. Parathyroid cancer is described as either localized or metastatic: - Localized parathyroid cancer is found in a parathyroid gland and may have spread to nearby tissues. - Metastatic parathyroid cancer has spread to other parts of the body, such as the lungs, liver, bone, sac around the heart, pancreas, or lymph nodes.
What are the treatments for Parathyroid Cancer ?
There are different types of treatment for patients with parathyroid cancer. - Treatment includes control of hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood) in patients who have an overactive parathyroid gland. - Four types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - Supportive care - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with parathyroid cancer. Different types of treatment are available for patients with parathyroid cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Treatment includes control of hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood) in patients who have an overactive parathyroid gland. In order to reduce the amount of parathyroid hormone that is being made and control the level of calcium in the blood, as much of the tumor as possible is removed in surgery. For patients who cannot have surgery, medication may be used. Four types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Surgery (removing the cancer in an operation) is the most common treatment for parathyroid cancer that is in the parathyroid glands or has spread to other parts of the body. Because parathyroid cancer grows very slowly, cancer that has spread to other parts of the body may be removed by surgery in order to cure the patient or control the effects of the disease for a long time. Before surgery, treatment is given to control hypercalcemia. The following surgical procedures may be used: - En bloc resection: Surgery to remove the entire parathyroid gland and the capsule around it. Sometimes lymph nodes, half of the thyroid gland on the same side of the body as the cancer, and muscles, tissues, and a nerve in the neck are also removed. - Tumor debulking: A surgical procedure in which as much of the tumor as possible is removed. Some tumors cannot be completely removed. - Metastasectomy: Surgery to remove any cancer that has spread to distant organs such as the lung. Surgery for parathyroid cancer sometimes damages nerves of the vocal cords. There are treatments to help with speech problems caused by this nerve damage. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat parathyroid cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. Supportive care Supportive care is given to lessen the problems caused by the disease or its treatment. Supportive care for hypercalcemia caused by parathyroid cancer may include the following: - Intravenous (IV) fluids. - Drugs that increase how much urine the body makes. - Drugs that stop the body from absorbing calcium from the food we eat. - Drugs that stop the parathyroid gland from making parathyroid hormone. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Parathyroid cancer often recurs. Patients should have regular check-ups for the rest of their lives, to find and treat recurrences early. Treatment Options for Parathyroid Cancer Localized Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of localized parathyroid cancer may include the following: - Surgery (en bloc resection). - Surgery followed by radiation therapy. - Radiation therapy. - Supportive care to treat hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with localized parathyroid cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Metastatic Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of metastatic parathyroid cancer may include the following: - Surgery (metastasectomy) to remove cancer from the places where it has spread. - Surgery followed by radiation therapy. - Radiation therapy. - Chemotherapy. - Supportive care to treat hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with metastatic parathyroid cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Recurrent Parathyroid Cancer Treatment of recurrent parathyroid cancer may include the following: - Surgery (metastasectomy) to remove cancer from the places where it has recurred. - Surgery (tumor debulking). - Surgery followed by radiation therapy. - Radiation therapy. - Chemotherapy. - Supportive care to treat hypercalcemia (too much calcium in the blood). Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent parathyroid cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Parathyroid Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
What is are Lung Cancer ?
Lung cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the lung. - Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States. - Different factors increase or decrease the risk of lung cancer. Lung cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the lung. The lungs are a pair of cone-shaped breathing organs inside the chest. The lungs bring oxygen into the body when breathing in and send carbon dioxide out of the body when breathing out. Each lung has sections called lobes. The left lung has two lobes. The right lung, which is slightly larger, has three. A thin membrane called the pleura surrounds the lungs. Two tubes called bronchi lead from the trachea (windpipe) to the right and left lungs. The bronchi are sometimes involved in lung cancer. Small tubes called bronchioles and tiny air sacs called alveoli make up the inside of the lungs. There are two types of lung cancer: small cell lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. See the following PDQ summaries for more information about lung cancer: - Lung Cancer Prevention - Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment - Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States. Lung cancer is the third most common type of non-skin cancer in the United States. Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men and in women.
Who is at risk for Lung Cancer?
Different factors increase or decrease the risk of lung cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Anything that decreases your chance of getting a disease is called a protective factor. For information about risk factors and protective factors for lung cancer, see the PDQ summary on Lung Cancer Prevention. Key Points - Screening tests have risks. - The risks of lung cancer screening tests include the following: - Finding lung cancer may not improve health or help you live longer. - False-negative test results can occur. - False-positive test results can occur. - Chest x-rays and low-dose spiral CT scans expose the chest to radiation. - Talk to your doctor about your risk for lung cancer and your need for screening tests. Screening tests have risks. Decisions about screening tests can be difficult. Not all screening tests are helpful and most have risks. Before having any screening test, you may want to discuss the test with your doctor. It is important to know the risks of the test and whether it has been proven to reduce the risk of dying from cancer. The risks of lung cancer screening tests include the following: Finding lung cancer may not improve health or help you live longer. Screening may not improve your health or help you live longer if you have lung cancer that has already spread to other places in your body. When a screening test result leads to the diagnosis and treatment of a disease that may never have caused symptoms or become life-threatening, it is called overdiagnosis. It is not known if treatment of these cancers would help you live longer than if no treatment were given, and treatments for cancer may have serious side effects. Harms of treatment may happen more often in people who have medical problems caused by heavy or long-term smoking. False-negative test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be normal even though lung cancer is present. A person who receives a false-negative test result (one that shows there is no cancer when there really is) may delay seeking medical care even if there are symptoms. False-positive test results can occur. Screening test results may appear to be abnormal even though no cancer is present. A false-positive test result (one that shows there is cancer when there really isn't) can cause anxiety and is usually followed by more tests (such as biopsy), which also have risks. A biopsy to diagnose lung cancer can cause part of the lung to collapse. Sometimes surgery is needed to reinflate the lung. Harms of diagnostic tests may happen more often in patients who have medical problems caused by heavy or long-term smoking. Chest x-rays and low-dose spiral CT scans expose the chest to radiation. Radiation exposure from chest x-rays and low-dose spiral CT scans may increase the risk of cancer. Younger people and people at low risk for lung cancer are more likely to develop lung cancer caused by radiation exposure. . Talk to your doctor about your risk for lung cancer and your need for screening tests. Talk to your doctor or other health care provider about your risk for lung cancer, whether a screening test is right for you, and about the benefits and harms of the screening test. You should take part in the decision about whether a screening test is right for you. (See the PDQ summary on Cancer Screening Overview for more information.)
Key Points - Gallbladder cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the gallbladder. - Being female can increase the risk of developing gallbladder cancer. - Signs and symptoms of gallbladder cancer include jaundice, fever, and pain. - Gallbladder cancer is difficult to detect (find) and diagnose early. - Tests that examine the gallbladder and nearby organs are used to detect (find), diagnose, and stage gallbladder cancer. - Certain factors affect the prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. Gallbladder cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the gallbladder. Gallbladder cancer is a rare disease in which malignant (cancer) cells are found in the tissues of the gallbladder. The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ that lies just under the liver in the upper abdomen. The gallbladder stores bile, a fluid made by the liver to digest fat. When food is being broken down in the stomach and intestines, bile is released from the gallbladder through a tube called the common bile duct, which connects the gallbladder and liver to the first part of the small intestine. The wall of the gallbladder has 3 main layers of tissue. - Mucosal (inner) layer. - Muscularis (middle, muscle) layer. - Serosal (outer) layer. Between these layers is supporting connective tissue. Primary gallbladder cancer starts in the inner layer and spreads through the outer layers as it grows. Gallbladder cancer is difficult to detect (find) and diagnose early. Gallbladder cancer is difficult to detect and diagnose for the following reasons: - There are no signs or symptoms in the early stages of gallbladder cancer. - The symptoms of gallbladder cancer, when present, are like the symptoms of many other illnesses. - The gallbladder is hidden behind the liver. Gallbladder cancer is sometimes found when the gallbladder is removed for other reasons. Patients with gallstones rarely develop gallbladder cancer.</Answer>
Who is at risk for Gallbladder Cancer? ?
Being female can increase the risk of developing gallbladder cancer. Anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. Talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. Risk factors for gallbladder cancer include the following: - Being female. - Being Native American.
What are the symptoms of Gallbladder Cancer ?
Signs and symptoms of gallbladder cancer include jaundice, fever, and pain. These and other signs and symptoms may be caused by gallbladder cancer or by other conditions. Check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes). - Pain above the stomach. - Fever. - Nausea and vomiting. - Bloating. - Lumps in the abdomen.
How to diagnose Gallbladder Cancer ?
Tests that examine the gallbladder and nearby organs are used to detect (find), diagnose, and stage gallbladder cancer. Procedures that make pictures of the gallbladder and the area around it help diagnose gallbladder cancer and show how far the cancer has spread. The process used to find out if cancer cells have spread within and around the gallbladder is called staging. In order to plan treatment, it is important to know if the gallbladder cancer can be removed by surgery. Tests and procedures to detect, diagnose, and stage gallbladder cancer are usually done at the same time. The following tests and procedures may be used: - Physical exam and history : An exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. A history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - Liver function tests : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by the liver. A higher than normal amount of a substance can be a sign of liver disease that may be caused by gallbladder cancer. - Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) assay : A test that measures the level of CEA in the blood. CEA is released into the bloodstream from both cancer cells and normal cells. When found in higher than normal amounts, it can be a sign of gallbladder cancer or other conditions. - CA 19-9 assay : A test that measures the level of CA 19-9 in the blood. CA 19-9 is released into the bloodstream from both cancer cells and normal cells. When found in higher than normal amounts, it can be a sign of gallbladder cancer or other conditions. - Blood chemistry studies : A procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. An unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. - CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, taken from different angles. The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - Ultrasound exam: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes. The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram. An abdominal ultrasound is done to diagnose gallbladder cancer. - PTC (percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography): A procedure used to x-ray the liver and bile ducts. A thin needle is inserted through the skin below the ribs and into the liver. Dye is injected into the liver or bile ducts and an x-ray is taken. If a blockage is found, a thin, flexible tube called a stent is sometimes left in the liver to drain bile into the small intestine or a collection bag outside the body. - Chest x-ray : An x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. An x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography): A procedure used to x-ray the ducts (tubes) that carry bile from the liver to the gallbladder and from the gallbladder to the small intestine. Sometimes gallbladder cancer causes these ducts to narrow and block or slow the flow of bile, causing jaundice. An endoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is passed through the mouth, esophagus, and stomach into the first part of the small intestine. A catheter (a smaller tube) is then inserted through the endoscope into the bile ducts. A dye is injected through the catheter into the ducts and an x-ray is taken. If the ducts are blocked by a tumor, a fine tube may be inserted into the duct to unblock it. This tube (or stent) may be left in place to keep the duct open. Tissue samples may also be taken. - Laparoscopy : A surgical procedure to look at the organs inside the abdomen to check for signs of disease. Small incisions (cuts) are made in the wall of the abdomen and a laparoscope (a thin, lighted tube) is inserted into one of the incisions. Other instruments may be inserted through the same or other incisions to perform procedures such as removing organs or taking tissue samples for biopsy. The laparoscopy helps to find out if the cancer is within the gallbladder only or has spread to nearby tissues and if it can be removed by surgery. - Biopsy : The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. The biopsy may be done after surgery to remove the tumor. If the tumor clearly cannot be removed by surgery, the biopsy may be done using a fine needle to remove cells from the tumor.
What is the outlook for Gallbladder Cancer ?
Certain factors affect the prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: - The stage of the cancer (whether the cancer has spread from the gallbladder to other places in the body). - Whether the cancer can be completely removed by surgery. - The type of gallbladder cancer (how the cancer cell looks under a microscope). - Whether the cancer has just been diagnosed or has recurred (come back). Treatment may also depend on the age and general health of the patient and whether the cancer is causing signs or symptoms. Gallbladder cancer can be cured only if it is found before it has spread, when it can be removed by surgery. If the cancer has spread, palliative treatment can improve the patient's quality of life by controlling the symptoms and complications of this disease. Taking part in one of the clinical trials being done to improve treatment should be considered. Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI website.
What are the stages of Gallbladder Cancer ?
Tests and procedures to stage gallbladder cancer are usually done at the same time as diagnosis. - There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - The following stages are used for gallbladder cancer: - Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) - Stage I - Stage II - Stage IIIA - Stage IIIB - Stage IVA - Stage IVB - For gallbladder cancer, stages are also grouped according to how the cancer may be treated. There are two treatment groups: - Localized (Stage I) - Unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic (Stage II, Stage III, and Stage IV) Tests and procedures to stage gallbladder cancer are usually done at the same time as diagnosis. See the General Information section for a description of tests and procedures used to detect, diagnose, and stage gallbladder cancer. There are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. Cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - Tissue. The cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - Lymph system. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. The cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - Blood. The cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. The cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. Cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. When cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. Cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - Lymph system. The cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - Blood. The cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. The metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. For example, if gallbladder cancer spreads to the liver, the cancer cells in the liver are actually gallbladder cancer cells. The disease is metastatic gallbladder cancer, not liver cancer. The following stages are used for gallbladder cancer: Stage 0 (Carcinoma in Situ) In stage 0, abnormal cells are found in the inner (mucosal) layer of the gallbladder. These abnormal cells may become cancer and spread into nearby normal tissue. Stage 0 is also called carcinoma in situ. Stage I In stage I, cancer has formed and has spread beyond the inner (mucosal) layer to a layer of tissue with blood vessels or to the muscle layer. Stage II In stage II, cancer has spread beyond the muscle layer to the connective tissue around the muscle. Stage IIIA In stage IIIA, cancer has spread through the thin layers of tissue that cover the gallbladder and/or to the liver and/or to one nearby organ (such as the stomach, small intestine, colon, pancreas, or bile ducts outside the liver). Stage IIIB In stage IIIB, cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes and: - beyond the inner layer of the gallbladder to a layer of tissue with blood vessels or to the muscle layer; or - beyond the muscle layer to the connective tissue around the muscle; or - through the thin layers of tissue that cover the gallbladder and/or to the liver and/or to one nearby organ (such as the stomach, small intestine, colon, pancreas, or bile ducts outside the liver). Stage IVA In stage IVA, cancer has spread to a main blood vessel of the liver or to 2 or more nearby organs or areas other than the liver. Cancer may have spread to nearby lymph nodes. Stage IVB In stage IVB, cancer has spread to either: - lymph nodes along large arteries in the abdomen and/or near the lower part of the backbone; or - to organs or areas far away from the gallbladder. For gallbladder cancer, stages are also grouped according to how the cancer may be treated. There are two treatment groups: Localized (Stage I) Cancer is found in the wall of the gallbladder and can be completely removed by surgery. Unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic (Stage II, Stage III, and Stage IV) Unresectable cancer cannot be removed completely by surgery. Most patients with gallbladder cancer have unresectable cancer. Recurrent cancer is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated. Gallbladder cancer may come back in the gallbladder or in other parts of the body. Metastasis is the spread of cancer from the primary site (place where it started) to other places in the body. Metastatic gallbladder cancer may spread to surrounding tissues, organs, throughout the abdominal cavity, or to distant parts of the body.
What are the treatments for Gallbladder Cancer ?
There are different types of treatment for patients with gallbladder cancer. - Three types of standard treatment are used: - Surgery - Radiation therapy - Chemotherapy - New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - Radiation sensitizers - Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - Follow-up tests may be needed. There are different types of treatment for patients with gallbladder cancer. Different types of treatments are available for patients with gallbladder cancer. Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. Some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. Three types of standard treatment are used: Surgery Gallbladder cancer may be treated with a cholecystectomy, surgery to remove the gallbladder and some of the tissues around it. Nearby lymph nodes may be removed. A laparoscope is sometimes used to guide gallbladder surgery. The laparoscope is attached to a video camera and inserted through an incision (port) in the abdomen. Surgical instruments are inserted through other ports to perform the surgery. Because there is a risk that gallbladder cancer cells may spread to these ports, tissue surrounding the port sites may also be removed. If the cancer has spread and cannot be removed, the following types of palliative surgery may relieve symptoms: - Surgical biliary bypass: If the tumor is blocking the small intestine and bile is building up in the gallbladder, a biliary bypass may be done. During this operation, the gallbladder or bile duct will be cut and sewn to the small intestine to create a new pathway around the blocked area. - Endoscopic stent placement: If the tumor is blocking the bile duct, surgery may be done to put in a stent (a thin, flexible tube) to drain bile that has built up in the area. The stent may be placed through a catheter that drains to the outside of the body or the stent may go around the blocked area and drain the bile into the small intestine. - Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage: A procedure done to drain bile when there is a blockage and endoscopic stent placement is not possible. An x-ray of the liver and bile ducts is done to locate the blockage. Images made by ultrasound are used to guide placement of a stent, which is left in the liver to drain bile into the small intestine or a collection bag outside the body. This procedure may be done to relieve jaundice before surgery. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. There are two types of radiation therapy: - External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. External radiation therapy is used to treat gallbladder cancer. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). When chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Radiation sensitizers Clinical trials are studying ways to improve the effect of radiation therapy on tumor cells, including the following: - Hyperthermia therapy: A treatment in which body tissue is exposed to high temperatures to damage and kill cancer cells or to make cancer cells more sensitive to the effects of radiation therapy and certain anticancer drugs. - Radiosensitizers: Drugs that make tumor cells more sensitive to radiation therapy. Giving radiation therapy together with radiosensitizers may kill more tumor cells. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials. Follow-up tests may be needed. Some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. Some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. Decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. Some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. The results of these tests can show if your condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). These tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. Treatment Options for Gallbladder Cancer Localized Gallbladder Cancer Treatment of localized gallbladder cancer may include the following: - Surgery to remove the gallbladder and some of the tissue around it. Part of the liver and nearby lymph nodes may also be removed. Radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy may follow surgery. - Radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of radiation therapy with radiosensitizers. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with localized gallbladder cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. . Unresectable, Recurrent, or Metastatic Gallbladder Cancer Treatment of unresectable, recurrent, or metastatic gallbladder cancer is usually within a clinical trial. Treatment may include the following: - Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage or the placement of stents to relieve symptoms caused by blocked bile ducts. This may be followed by radiation therapy as palliative treatment. - Surgery as palliative treatment to relieve symptoms caused by blocked bile ducts. - Chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of new ways to give palliative radiation therapy, such as giving it together with hyperthermia therapy, radiosensitizers, or chemotherapy. - A clinical trial of new drugs and drug combinations. Check the list of NCI-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with unresectable gallbladder cancer, recurrent gallbladder cancer and metastatic gallbladder cancer. For more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. Talk with your doctor about clinical trials that may be right for you. .
what research (or clinical trials) is being done for Gallbladder Cancer ?
New types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. This summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. It may not mention every new treatment being studied. Information about clinical trials is available from the NCI website. Radiation sensitizers Clinical trials are studying ways to improve the effect of radiation therapy on tumor cells, including the following: - Hyperthermia therapy: A treatment in which body tissue is exposed to high temperatures to damage and kill cancer cells or to make cancer cells more sensitive to the effects of radiation therapy and certain anticancer drugs. - Radiosensitizers: Drugs that make tumor cells more sensitive to radiation therapy. Giving radiation therapy together with radiosensitizers may kill more tumor cells. Patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. For some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. Clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. Clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. Many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. Patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. Patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. Even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. Patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. Some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. Other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. There are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. See the Treatment Options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. These have been retrieved from NCI's listing of clinical trials.
